# Flexagon Lovers Newsgroup 2009

## platonic flexagons
January 1, 2009

### Scott Sherman

Since New Years is a good time for idealism, I figured I would post some theoretical musings.

Consider the series of hexaflexagons made from straight strips of triangles.  Start with the 3-sided version, with its various faces and hinges.  Now consider the 6-sided hexaflexagon, which has all the same faces and hinges but adds new ones.  Stepping to the 12-sided variant, we again see all the same faces and hinges with new ones added.  Continuing this process an infinite number of times gives you a fractal made up of an infinite number of stacked triangles.  This fractal has been compared to a dragon curve (Harold V. McIntosh:  http://cellular.ci.ulsa.mx/comun/fxgonw/fxgon.html).  You can think of this infinite-sided hexaflexagon as an idealized "platonic hexaflexagon. "

You could create an infinite-sided hexaflexagon from other sequences as well, e.g. the sequence of braids (http://loki3.com/flex/braids.html).  An infinite braid would give you a different hexaflexagon however.  With a braided hexaflexagon, one side is different from the rest in that it can appear opposite all other sides when you do the Tuckerman traverse while all other sides only appear opposite three different sides.

* Conjecture 1:  All hexaflexagons, both finite and infinite, are a subset of the platonic hexaflexagon.

No matter where you're exploring in the platonic hexaflexagon, there are only a finite number of faces and hinges accessible in a given configuration.  However many times you use the pinch flex, there will always be exactly four pinch flexes you can perform from any position, two on one side and two from the opposite side.  This should be clear from looking at the state diagram of any finite hexaflexagon because there's a maximum of four lines coming off any node in the diagram.

* Conjecture 2:  A pinch flex transforms the platonic hexaflexagon into a structurally identical arrangement of faces and edges.  In other words, if you don't label the faces, the before and after states are indistinguishable.

I was trying various flexes on a 12-sided straight-strip hexaflexagon (e.g. the v-flex, pyramid shuffle and tuck flex - see http://loki3.com/flex/flex/index.html).  I'll refer to a flex that transforms a hexaflexagon from one hexagon configuration to another as a "hexagon flex" to distinguish it from flexes such as the pocket flex that don't.  I found that, for each hexagon flex, there was a configuration of the hexaflexagon where I could start from a position that allowed four pinch flexes, apply the flex and end up back in a configuration that allowed four pinch flexes.  This messes up the sides of course, but it led me to a stronger conclusion.

* Conjecture 3:  Any hexagon flex transforms the platonic hexaflexagon into a structurally identical arrangement of faces and edges.


----
## Several hexaflexagon related theorems and conjectures
January 12, 2009

### Yaacov Belenky

Hi everybody,

My name is Yaacov Belenky, I live in Israel, and I just found the Flexagon_Lovers group.  More than 30 years ago, when I was about 16-18 years old and lived in Moscow, I read about flexagons in Martin Gardner's books (in Russian translation) and then spent on flexagons at least several months, first to learn how to return back after V-flexes, and then to build some generalization of Tuckerman diagrams for flexagon states that appear after V-flexes. I never published this work. Last month my 18 years old daughter Miriam asked me to explain my theory to her. After I did, she urged me to let other people know about it. When I explained the theory to Miriam, I started to think more about it, and about a week ago I managed to prove the following two theorems.

**Definition.** A **regular state** of a flexagon is a state in which is has a rotational symmetry of order 3.

**Theorem 1.** If the same **straight** strip has been folded in two ways, producing two flexagon  in **regular** states A and B, then there exists a sequence of O(n) pinch flexes, V-flexes, rotations and flips that converts A to a state isomorphic to B, where n is the length of the strip.

(Of course, not all intermediate states in the sequence will be regular.)

Theorem 2 is a generalization of theorem 1, but with a worse upper limit for the sequence length .

**Theorem 2.** If **any** strip has been folded in two ways, producing two flexagon  in **regular** statesA and B, then there exists a sequence of O(n*n) pinch flexes, V-flexes,rotations and flips that converts A to a state isomorphic to B, where n is the length of the strip.

I have also two conjectures that I believe to be correct but presently don't know to prove.

**Conjecture 1.** If the same **straight** strip has been folded in two ways, producing two flexagon  in any (not necessarily regular) states A and B, then there exists a sequence of pinch flexes, V-flexes, rotations and flips that converts A to a state isomorphic to B.

(Note that the strip may be such that the flexagon has no regular states at all, e.g. if n = 3  or 6 mod 9.)

**Conjecture 2.** In theorem 2 the upper limit may be improved to O(n).

Regarding the most general form of the theorem (any strip and any states), it cannot be proven because it is false - I have a counterexample. I believe however that the vast majority of the states folded from the same arbitrary strip can be converted one to another, but presently don't have a characterization of this subset, not to speak about a proof.

I will be glad to share the theory and the proofs with the flexagon community, although it may take some time to write them down (I never did it).

### Scott Sherman

Welcome Yaacov,

Interesting work.  We've had a few conjectures on which flexes are sufficient for exploring a flexagon, but no proofs.  I like how you use the definition of regular state to confine what the flexes need to accomplish.  It's interesting that the pinch flex and v-flex are sufficient for transforming between those states.  The first I heard of the v-flex transforming between two regular states was when Robin Moseley mentioned that it worked for the 7-sided version (http://flexagon.net/).  I wonder what other sets of flexes would be sufficient?  Or, given that the v-flex doesn't work on triangle flexagons other than the hexaflexagon, what sets of flexes work in the more general case (pinch & tuck?).

In looking at your conjectures, my first guess is that the pinch flex and v-flex are not sufficient.  When we were looking into the minimum set of flexes needed to fully explore a point flexagon (http://www.loki3.com/flex/point-flexagon.html), we found that as you add sides you occasionally need to add new flexes.  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGQ_I4_N3sE&feature=channel_page shows some more flexes you can do on a hexaflexagon (also described at http://www.loki3.com/flex/flex/index.html).  My guess would be that a flex such as the slot flex opens up possibilities that you can't get to with just the pinch flex and v-flex.

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

Thank you for your useful remarks and links. In particular, the video is great; from it, with help of my daughter Miriam, I learned how to perform slot flex.

Till now I studied only hexaflexagons and tetraflexagons (the latter ones - only 30 years ago; I did not refresh them in my memory recently yet), so I presently have no opinion which kinds of flexes are necessary for other kinds of flexagons. However, in hexaflexagons the slot flex, tuck flex, and pyramid shuffle add nothing to the combination of pinch and v-flexes. I can say even more.

**Definition.** Two states are **pinch equivalent** if it is possible to move from one to the second using only pinch flexes.

**Definition.** Any equivalence class of states by pinch equivalence is called a **pinch class**.

**Definition.** Two pinch classes A and B are called **v-adjacent** if there exist states a from A and b from B and a v-flex that transforms a to b.

**Definition.** The **v-distance** between two pinch classes A and B is the minimal n such that there exists a sequence of n+1 pinch classes X[0]=A, X[1],...,X[n] +B, such that any two adjacent classes in this sequence are v-adjacent.

**Theorem 3.** If a tuck flex / pyramid shuffle / slot flex transform state a to state b, then the v-distance between their pinch classes is 1 / 1 / 2, correspondingly.

In the meantime, I came out with the following conjecture that I believe to be true and that that is the last generalization of my theorems for hexaflexagons.

**Definition.** A state is called **singular** is no pinch or v-flexes are possible from this state.

Conjecture 3. If the same strip (not necessarily straight) has been folded in two ways, producing two flexagon  in any **non-singular** states A and B, then there exists a sequence of pinch flexes, V-flexes, rotations and flips that converts A to a state isomorphic to B.

(Flexagons folded from a straight strip have no singular states, so Conjecture 2 follows from Conjecture 3. And no one can expect singular states to be connected.)

Do you think you have a counterexample? If yes, you (and everybody else) are welcome to challenge me!

Good flexing!

### Scott Sherman

Yaacov,

In the video of the 5-sided hexaflexagon, I show a slot flex that takes you to a singular state, i.e. you can't do a pinch flex or v-flex from that position.  The only possible hexagon-preserving flexes from here are a slot flex (the opposite of what put you in that state) and a pyramid shuffle.  The pyramid shuffle takes you to a third state, also singular, where the only possible flex is the pyramid shuffle that takes you back to the previous hexagon.

That said, is there an unstated assumption behind what you list as Theorem 3?  I used the slot flex to take me to a state b that isn't v-adjacent to the original state a.  And then I used the pyramid shuffle to take me to a third state c that isn't v-adjacent to either one.

On conjecture 3, if you strengthen the prerequisites to any **regular** states A and B, it seems more likely to be true.  I was playing with a complex set of pocket flexes and slot flexes on the 7-sided braid (aka "fan") and found a position where there were 3 states in the pinch class.  There was one possible v-flex you could do from one of those states, but you couldn't do any pinch flexes from the resulting state.  There was no way to pinch or v-flex back to the original flexagon.  Unfortunately the sequence of flexes I used is difficult to explain in words.

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

See my remarks below (indented and marked "[YB]")

Yaacov Belenky

--- In Flexagon_Lovers@ yahoogroups. com, Scott Sherman wrote:

Yaacov,

In the video of the 5-sided hexaflexagon, I show a slot flex that takes you to a singular state, i.e. you can't do a pinch flex or v-flex from that position. The only possible hexagon-preserving flexes from here are a slot flex (the opposite of what put you in that state) and a pyramid shuffle. The pyramid shuffle takes you to a third state, also singular, where the only possible flex is the pyramid shuffle that takes you back to the previous hexagon.

    [YB] I managed to perform the flexes that you describe in the paragraph above. Indeed my Theorem 3 as I formulated it was wrong, and you gave a counterexample; thank you for pointing this out. The theorem is still correct for your "platonic flexagon" or in any case close enough to it, i.e. whenever all relevant pats are thick enough. I need to study these kinds of flexes deeper to make my statement precise.

That said, is there an unstated assumption behind what you list as Theorem 3? I used the slot flex to take me to a state b that isn't v-adjacent to the original state a. And then I used the pyramid shuffle to take me to a third state c that isn't v-adjacent to either one.

    [YB] I guess, also somewhere around singular states?

On conjecture 3, if you strengthen the prerequisites to any regular states A and B, it seems more likely to be true.

    [YB] For regular states I know to prove it. I am now writing the proofs down; I guess it'll take me several more days before I can upload it.

I was playing with a complex set of pocket flexes and slot flexes on the 7-sided braid (aka "fan") and found a position where there were 3 states in the pinch class. There was one possible v-flex you could do from one of those states, but you couldn't do any pinch flexes from the resulting state. There was no way to pinch or v-flex back to the original flexagon.

    [YB] Do you prohibit to flip the flexagon to upside down? Because if not, any v-flex may be reverted by a flip, another v-flex and flip. I see that in http://math.georgiasouthern.edu/~bmclean/flex/powerpoints/MAA2007.ppt Bruce McLean does not use flip, but it seems to me somewhat unnatural.

Unfortunately the sequence of flexes I used is difficult to explain in words.

    [YB] It is possible to use Bruce's notation from the applet at http://math.georgiasouthern.edu/~bmclean/flex/index.html (P for pinch, V for v, R for rotate left, r for rotate right, adding also F for flip).

### Scott Sherman

I was looking further into some of the flexes and found an interesting result.  For each of the four flexes - pinch flex, v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle - it's possible to create a flexagon that allows only that single flex and none of the other 3 (surprisingly, a minimum of 9 leaves is required for each).  I'll post more on this later, but the conclusion to draw from this is that each of those flexes does something unique, so any statement about only needing a subset of those flexes to explore all states of a hexaflexagon would have to be explicit about the what types of flexagons and states are included in the statement, e.g. referring to just the "regular" states.

As for the slot flex and a description of the sequence I was referring to, I should point out that my use of the term "slot flex" isn't nearly as well-defined as with the other flexes.  In fact I see it as more of a technique than as a single flex.  Typically I'll start with one or more pocket flexes, find a slot I can slide a portion of the flexagon through one or more times, and possibly continue alternating between pocket flexes and sliding leaves through slots.  Once you accept that a flex doesn't have to immediately take you back to a hexagon, you can wonder around quite a lot this way, visiting all sorts of interesting intermediate shapes and sometimes leading you to a different hexagon state.  The particular sequence I mentioned involves 4 pocket flexes and sliding a leaf through a slot 4 times.  I have a notation I use to describe it, but it's visual rather than textual.  When I have some spare time I may post that as well.

In answer to the question of whether I allow the flexagon to be turned over, clearly I have one of the more liberal definitions of what a flex is, so flipping is definitely allowed ;)

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

I was interested in your statementthat "each of the four flexes - pinch
flex, v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle - it's possible to create a
flexagon that allows only that single flex and none of the other 3
(surprisingly, a minimum of 9 leaves is required for each)". I knew that
the minimal v-flaxable flexagon has 9 leaves, but I never studied deeply
the other 3 kinds of flexes. I did not deal with the slot flex and
pyramid shuffle yet, but when I looked into the tuck flex I received
different results.

Namely, as far as I can see, the minimal tuck-flexable flexagon has 10
leaves, and if they are numbered from 1 to 10 along the strip, the pats
are (10 1) (2) (3) (5 6 4) (8 7) (9) (state A). After tucking pats (3)
and (5 6 4) inside I receive (1) (3 4 2) (5) (7 6) (8) (10 9) (state B).
On the other hand, by flip + v-flex + flip I reach (2 1) (4) (6 5) (7)
(9 8) (10) (state C), which is pinch equivalent to state B. If we glue
together leaves 5 and 6, we receive the minimal v-flexable flexagon.

Moreover, the minimal v-flexable flexagon has just two states, each one
reachable from the other by a v-flex, i.e. the v-flex is invertible. The
minimal tuck-flexable flexagom has 5 states, and only two pairs of them
are connected by tuck flexes - each pair in one direction only, i.e. the
tuck flex is not invertible!

Please let me know if you see a mistake in my results. Maybe we
understand tuck flex differently? I think I do whst is shown in you
video...

### Scott Sherman

Hmmm.  I'm not sure what the shape of your strip is, but perhaps you could try pasting together leaves 8 and 7.  Then fold it in half between pats (5 4 6) and (7), which is also between pats (10 1) and (2).  Open it up from the center and tuck (4 5) and (6 7 8) into the middle (noting that opening it up transferred leaf 6 to a different pat).  (Though the fact that you said (5 6 4) probably means that the shape is subtly different from what I was thinking it was.)

If I misunderstood and that doesn't work, try the following:

```
++++-++--
11222b122
2aa11ccb1
```

This uses Conrad and Hartline's notation for a flexagon strip.  Each column describes a leaf, with the top number going on one side and the bottom number on the other.  The +'s and -'s describe which direction the next leaf should go in.  I think this notation makes more sense when the strip has been folded up into a single triangle than when it's sitting in its unfolded state, but it has some good uses.  (I've also seen RLRL used to describe the unfolded state.)  Basically ++++++ is a straight strip and +-+-+- is a hexagon.  http://cellular.ci.ulsa.mx/comun/flexagon/node5.html has more details.  Once you make the strip (which I'll post when I've got a chance), fold c on c, b on b and a on a.  There will be exactly one place where you can perform a tuck flex.

Yes, I agree - the v-flex is its own inverse and the tuck flex is not (a fact I didn't realize till I created the minimal flexagon above).  You can do the tuck flex in reverse if you're careful, but it's not a graceful move.  When you use the minimal tuck flex flexagon, you can only do a single tuck flex and the only way out of the new state is to do the tuck flex in reverse.  The pinch flex and pyramid shuffle are also their own inverses.


----
## one atom thick, arranged in flexable hexagons
January 17, 2009

### Kathy Knapp

A great new product with potential. This article may be of interest to some of you.
http://snipr.com/a66i6

### John Andrisan

And origami too...

### Kathy Knapp

Apparently the tiny url didn't work, so here is the whole article.


#### Bendy gadget future for graphene
By Jason Palmer
Science and Technology reporter, BBC News

Graphene graphic (SPL)
A pencil's 'lead' is primarily graphite, made up of millions of sheets of graphene

**A remarkable material called graphene could soon be used to make flexible and transparent high-speed electronics, researchers say.**

Graphene's incredible mechanical and electronic properties are well known, but it is difficult to make in bulk.

It consists of one-atom-thick layers of carbon atoms arranged in hexagons.

A report in the journal Nature is the third in recent efforts that have seen the production of centimetre-scale samples of graphene.

The transparent samples can be fixed to any surface and bent or twisted without damaging them.

When the technique is perfected, such films could be used in solar cells as well as any number of bendy, thin, transparent gadgetry, such as crystal-clear, flexible displays.

**Getting lead out**

First discovered in 2004, graphene is a close cousin of carbon nanotubes, which are in effect graphene rolled up.

Tiny, high-quality samples of graphene can be sourced by using sticky tape to simply pull them off graphite - the same stuff that is in a pencil lead.

Transistors made from such samples have been shown to operate at gigahertz frequencies - comparable to the speed of modern computers. The material could theoretically operate near terahertz frequencies, hundreds of times faster.

The samples also have remarkable mechanical strength, because the bond that carbon atoms form between themselves is one of the strongest known.

> It's a really important development
>
> Andre Geim, University of Manchester

And it gets even better: because they are so thin, the sheets are practically transparent.

**Under the sheets**

However, for wider application, graphene must be made in larger sheets while maintaining the high quality of the smaller samples.

A suggestion first proposed a few years ago is now coming to fruition: evaporating a mixture of large carbon-containing molecules and firing it over a heated metal surface.

The molecules break down, releasing carbon that re-organises on the surface in neat graphene sheets. The precise conditions of the experiment determine how many sheets are produced.

While growth of such films on metal surfaces has been known to happen for decades, no one had been able to remove the films from the metal, and no one knew if graphene, once removed, would maintain its spectacular potential.

Now, Byung Hee Hong at Sungkyunkwan University in Seoul, South Korea, and colleagues have applied the technique to produce films of up to 12 sheets on extremely thin pieces of nickel.

By dissolving away the nickel with chemicals, the researchers were left with graphene films they could stick to a flexible polymer called PET.

The researchers went on to show that because the films are so robust, they maintain their striking electronic properties even when bent and twisted.

**Great minds**

The work confirms that the approach is the most promising path towards bendy, practically invisible electronics. In December, Jing Kong of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) published the first account of successfully producing graphene films using the nickel technique.
Nanotube (SPL)
Graphene offers much of the promise of carbon nanotubes, in sheet form

They showed that the precise structure of the graphene films they produced could be controlled by putting a nanometre-scale pattern on the thin nickel plates.

Earlier in January, Yong Chen led a group from Purdue University, US, that published a paper on the arXiv website detailing the approach.

After production, their films were deposited onto silicon-based substrates, showing a potential means to supplement existing microelectronics with the terrifying speed of graphene components.

Andre Geim, whose group first discovered graphene and demonstrated its potential for electronics, is impressed with the recent flood of demonstrations.

"It's a really important development, " Professor Geim, who is based at the University of Manchester, told BBC News.

"It took five years from our demonstration of the beautiful properties of isolated graphene and now, at last, three groups have demonstrated that it's possible."

However, he notes that the samples produced using the new technique are so far relatively disordered and made of regions of differing numbers of graphene layers.

For the speediest electronics, only a single layer like that acquired with sticky tape will do.

"Until now, everyone has been using our so-called 'pencil technique' (the sticky-tape method) but the disadvantage is that the graphite crystals are quite small - it's really painstaking research," Professor Geim explained.

Widespread availability of larger, high-quality graphene films will vastly speed up research into the material's properties, putting researchers ever closer to real applications.

"This technique shows the missing element for the whole story, from finding graphene to making real transistors because it shows that industrial scale production is possible," Andre Geim said.


----
## Martin Gardner Book
January 22, 2009

### Ann Schwartz

HEXAFLEXAGONS, PROBABILITY PARADOXES, AND THE TOWER OF HANOI by
Martin Gardner, revised edition, is now available on Amazon. The
publisher is Cambridge University Press.

The first chapter is on hexaflexagons and the new postscript and
bibliography include references to a number of people in this user
group: Les Pook, myself, Ela Schwartz, Jean Pedersen, David Mitchell,
Frank Bernhart, and Phil Mitchell.

Les, he calls your book "a marvelous survey of flexagon theory,
covering a wide variety of flexagons... " (I'd get Gardner's
persmission to use that quote on the cover of your next book,
attributing it, of course, to Martin Gardner on Flexagons Inside Out.)

Amazon has its "Search Inside" available for this book, so you can
look up your name.

I also requested permission from Cambridge University Press to scan
and post the postscript and bibliography for the flexagon chapter in
the files section of this user group. I'll let the group know when
and if that comes through.

Jeff (Rutzky), I'll sorry but your name is misspelled in the book to
the point of being unrecognizable. I notified my contact at Cambridge
University Press about this.

### Les Pook

Ann

Thanks for the information. I've ordered a copy of Martin Gardner's
book, and will add it to the references in my new book. The
manuscript is nearly ready to send to Springer.

Do you know when 'Homage to a pied puzzler' will be published? Amazon
tell me that publication has been delayed. I'd like to cite the book
as a reference, but need to see it first.

Anyone who wants to try it should note that one of the features
of 'Look Inside', that is available on Amazon.com, is not available
on Amazon.co.uk. This is because of copyright issues.

### Ann Schwartz

Hi Les,

The last time I spoke to someone at A K Peters, the contact told me that the book would
be printing in late Janurary. So it's time for me to call them again, and then post the news.

In the meantime, I did yet permission to reprint pages from the Gardner book, and will be
applying my puny computer skills to posting the pages mentioned earlier.


----
## basic flexes
January 24, 2009

### Scott Sherman

The most basic flex on a triangle flexagon is the pocket flex.  It's the only flex that can be done on all triangle flexagons, down to the simplest 6 leaf triangle tetraflexagon.  It demonstrates the basic flexagon behavior of transferring leaves between pats.  It's also the basic component of several other flexes, with a series of pocket flexes even serving as a replacement for the pinch flex.

The pinch flex requires at least 9 leaves (e.g. the trihexaflexagon) , so you might figure it's the next simplest flex after the pocket flex.  But what's interesting is that the v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle can all be performed on a 9 leaf flexagon as well, though with different flexagons in each case.

The pinch flex, v-flex and tuck flex all require a minimum of 3 hinges while the pyramid shuffle requires 4.  However, the pyramid shuffle only requires 5 pats while the others require 6, thus the pyramid shuffle can be done on a triangle pentaflexagon with 9 leaves whereas the others require a minimum of a hexaflexagon with 9 leaves.

I've included the simplest flexagon for each of these flexes on the pages where I describe the flexes.  The v-flex can be found at http://loki3.com/flex/flex/v.html, the tuck flex at http://loki3.com/flex/flex/tuck. html and the pyramid shuffle at http://loki3.com/flex/flex/pyramid-shuffle.html.

I've also included a flexagon specifically designed for doing a series of tuck flexes.  Flexagons are generally built specifically for the pinch flex, but this isn't a necessity.  There are actually more possible flexagons than the typical count of flexagons per number of sides would indicate.


----
## Transformations between flexagons
January 17, 2009

### Les Pook

I have followed recent postings on transformations between apparently distinct types of flexagons, that can be folded from the same net, with considerable interest. There are some further examples in my forthcoming book, but I haven't been able to draw any general conclusions, beyond the obvious fact that the torsion (number of half twists around a flexagon) must be the same for a transformation to be possible.

Postings by Jaacov and Scott address the question of finding flexes that can be used to perform transformations. Some flexes, such as simple flexes for point flexagons, and pinch flexes, can be carried out without bending the leaves, and leaves can be regarded as rigid and of zero thickness. If the leaves are rigid and of zero thickness then a flexagon is a mechanism. Some mechanisms are locked, that is there are positions (states) that cannot be reached from a given starting position without disconnecting a hinge, reassembling it in a desired position, and reconnecting the hinge. Some flexagons behave like this.

Some flexes require leaf bending, and a pragmatic approach is to regard as legitimate any flex that can be carried out on a paper model. Paper approximates to an inextensible, flexible material of zero thickness. If flexagons are made from sufficiently flexible material (which paper isn't) then a transformation would always be possible provided that the torsion is the same. Whether or not a particular flex is possible sometimes depends on what sort of paper is used. I use origami paper when a lot of leaf bending is needed.

In general, flexagons are simple bands, but some point flexagons are knotted bands. This is an additional complication for transformations between point flexagons that I haven't explored. I don't know of any edge flexagons that are knotted bands.

Jaacov, welcome aboard. I look forward to seeing your proof in detail. Last year Robin Moseley came across a Russian article on flexagons (Postings 471-475). We managed to follow some of the diagrams but no one knew enough Russian to read the text. Could you tell us what it's all about?

### Yaacov Belenky

Les,

I hope to upload an article with proofs on my theorems in a week or two.

Regarding the article in Russian: First of all, it is a continuation of
a series of articles, and one of the cited articles is from 1975, so
this article is not before 1975. Besides the schemes, I found nothing
particularly interesting in this article; it mostly refers to the
previous ones that I don't have a way to access. Actually around 1975 I
was both subscribed to this magazine and interested in flexagons, but I
don't remember this series of articles, which probably means that it
contained nothing essential beyond what I could learn from Martin
Gardner's articles.

I found also references to two articles in Russian in the magazine
"Quantum" from 1995 and 1996; they are available on the Internet, but I
did not check them yet.

### Scott Sherman

So for the nets that produce multiple flexagons, do all such variants always have the same torsion, or can they be different?  (Other than the obvious mirrored version for some nets.)

The question of whether to consider flexes that require bending the leaves is an interesting one, but since many of the flexes can be done without bending on different flexagons, I feel better about using them even when bending is required.  The tuck flex requires a lot of bending on a hexaflexagon, but can be done without bending on a star dodecaflexagon.  The pyramid shuffle requires bending on a hexaflexagon, but can be done without bending on an isosceles triangle octaflexagon.  And on the flip side, while a pinch flex can be done on a hexaflexagon without bending, there are times when it requires pretty severe bending on a star dodecaflexagon.  The only flex I use that seems to always require bending is the v-flex but then I haven't been able to generalize it beyond equilateral triangle flexagons.  And the only flex that never requires bending is the very basic pocket flex.

Of course, as Les points out, unlimited bending would allow all sorts of transformations so I haven't really come up with any hard and fast rules for what should be valid and what not.  I think a good analogy would be number theory.  There are plenty of interesting numbers to explore if you just limit yourself to addition and subtraction of whole numbers.  Including multiplication and division opens up the extra possibilities of the rational numbers.  Adding in powers and roots gives you irrationals and complex numbers.  Any subset is perfectly valid for exploration but so is including more possibilities.

### Les Pook

Yes, flexagon variants folded from the same net can have different
torsion. The flexagons shown in Figures 6.1 and 6.25 of 'Flexagons
inside out' are an example, and there are many others.

A useful concept when considering leaf bending is that of the
curvature of an edge hinged ring of polygons. The curvature is
defined as the angle deficit at the centre of the ring. For a ring of
6 equilateral triangles the sum of the angles at the centre of the
ring is 360 deg and the curvature is zero. For a ring of four
equilateral triangles the curvature is 120 deg, and for 8 equilateral
triangles it is -120 deg. The curvature is a topological invariant,
and the idea is borrowed from Gaussian curvature in differential
geometry.

My own feeling is that what flexes should be regarded as legitimate
is a matter of taste. Initially I felt that leaf bending shouldn't be
allowed but I now feel that this is much too restrictive since some
amusing flexes are not allowed, and a systematic approach to
flexagons is more difficult.

I like the analogy with number theory. In both number theory and
flexagons some of the underlying mathematics is difficult, but it is
possible to make significant discoveries without much mathematical
background.

### Scott Sherman

Ah yes, of course.  We also found that many nets for point flexagons generated flexagons with different torsion.  I guess I was specifically wondering about hexaflexagons that might have a bearing on some of Yaacov's conjectures.  Since you can v-flex between the two different flexagons produced by that one 7-sided variant (the last pair listed at http://www.flexagon.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=30&Itemid=35), those must have the same torsion.  But as the number of sides goes up, the number of strips with multiple foldings goes up quickly, so it seems like there's a chance you might run into variants you couldn't v-flex between.

### Ann Schwartz

Hi Les,

I'm not sure if this is what you're discussing below, but there are many flexagons that can
be made using the same strip (or template or freize) shown on Eighthsquare. com. (Is net
the right term?) This straight strip of "bronze" (30-60-90 degree triangles) can, of course,
be folded into a hexa-dodecaflexagon , which is hexagon composed of 12 bronze
triangles. However, the strip can also be folded into these flexagons. Many of them exhibit
the "toggle triangles" that shift the faces into different modes exhibited by the dodeca.

*Triangle flexagons. These are equilateral triangles composed of 6 bronze triangles, very
much like the ones on Scott Sherman's site. But these triangle flex into flat states. If you
cut the strip shown on hexa-dodeca strip exactly in half, you can fold a triangle that has
four faces. If you use the whole strip, you get a triangle with eight faces. Plus, like in the
dodeca, the bronze component triangles mix faces in an orderly fashion, so that there are
additional faces, so to speak. Interestingly enough, the gray triangles stay hidden. I think
the grey triangles are necessary in order to get flat states when you flex.

*The hollow hexagon. Start with the straight strip, and follow the directions on Eighthsquare. com. When you form a hollow hexagon--pretty early in the process, stop.
This hollow hexagon flexes. Pinch flex along three equidistant corners and you'll get a
propeller shape: a large equilateral triangle made of 18 bronze triangles with three
bronze triangles sticking out like propellers at each corner. Some of these states have only
two propellers. Some of these shapes can be flexed down into a hexagon and flexed like
the dodeca.

*Large triangle flexagon. You can also take the same strip and make a large equilateral
triangle made of 18 triangles (with no propellers). It flexes into pinwheel hexagons, and
can flex down into a hexagon that flexes.

*Six-pointed star flexagon. If you join two of the strips end to end, you can get a six-
pointed star flexagon. I think Scott has something similar on his site. This one flexes into
hexagonal pinwheels and triangle pinwheels. It can flex down into a dodeca. And there's
one flex that turns the whole thing chaotic--you end up with a ball of paper.

Using silver (45-45-90 degree) triangles. Again, I think Scott has similar flexagons, but
these have different properties, I believe because I use straight strips.

*A super square: 16 triangles, a square within a square. Flexes into a square pinwheel with
toggle triangles. I have to use paper clips on this one, to force it to behave.

*A six-sided flexagon. I know I've seen this on Scott's site. Again, with a straight strip, you
get flat states. This mixes faces, but I haven't figured out how many basic faces it has.

Along with some other flexagons, I presented these at the last Gathering for Gardner.

Some discoveries of the dodeca flexagon being published in Homage to a Pied Puzzler:

*You can flex along the creases that run from the midpoints of the sides of the hexagon
to the center. Sometimes the flexagon will open up into an equilateral triangle made of six
bronze triangles. You'll be able to flex this triangle a couple of times, each time revealing
a new face.

*You can flex the dodeca along four equidistant creases and get surfaces that have
triangles from three different faces.

*You can flex it along axes that are 30 and 120 degrees apart. The flexagon will open up
into a large parallelogram. (I'm pretty sure that I have seen that other people have
discovered this, too.) But this parallelogram can be flexed. This the only maneuver in
which I have to force the leaves back a little. But you will get flat states, some with
triangles from 5 of the faces. Eventually, the parallelogram flexes into a cup that reveals,
at last, the gray triangles. All of the gray triangles on the strips can be exposed in this
way.

I hope this is helpful.

### Les Pook

Ann

Yes, this is the sort of thing I had in mind. My rather loose
definition is: 'Some flexagons exist in different forms with
different forms belonging to different families. For convenience,
individual forms are sometimes regarded as flexagons in their own
right and given separate names. A flex sequence that transforms one
form into another is a transformation between flexagons.'.

Personally, I prefer 'net' because its use is well established in the
literature on polyhedra, and extends naturally to flexagons. I think
of 'template' and 'frieze' as American English rather than British
English usage, but immediately understand the meaning.

I've got a copy of Martin Gardner's new book. He's done us proud.


----
## pentahexaflexagon in strange state
January 25, 2009

### Bob Harris

Howdy,

I am rather a novice when it comes to flexagons. This weekend I printed out and
constructed Robin Moseley's Pentahexaflexgaon variation 1/1 (I don't recall where I found
it). I first did the usual flexes to travel the Tuckerman diagram given, so I think I have
folded it up correctly (though I believe there was a typo in the instructions, in that I ended
up gluing the backs of A6-D6, not A1-D6).

But I have now managed to get the thing into what to me seems a strange state. It is not a
flat hexagon but instead is two pyramids, each with a square base, sharing a common
triangular surface. From above the pyramids I see just the six A faces. Looking from
below the pyramids I see D3 D2 D1 D6 (clockwise) in one pyramid and E3 E4 E5 E6 in the
other. E3-D3 is the shared surface, though there are layers in between.

I am trying to figure out (a) how to get back to the original state, and (b) how I got into
this state in the first pace. For the latter, I started with face A up and folded it in half
(mountain crease), opened the crack along the top edge, and after that I'm not sure what I
did.

I've tried a few operations from the state it's in, but have had no luck. If I tug on D6-A6 I
can slide a triangle from between the two pyramids and one pyramid now has five
triangles, the other 3 (D3 D3 D1 D6 C6 and E3 E4 E5). I can also do the same by tugging
on E6-A5.

Oh... wait a sec. Just now I somehow managed to get it back to the flat hexagonal state.
But it is not in the original state. One face is A6 A5 A4 A3 D3 D2 and the other is A1 A2
E3 E4 E5 E6. Interesting.

Obviously this would be better with a video. But maybe this is old hat to people here.
Does anyone know how I would get this back to the original state?

Thanks for any help

### Scott Sherman

Hi Bob,

The way you got into the state where you had two pyramids was by doing a series of "pocket flexes."  You may have started doing a pinch flex (the standard flex) but only opened up one side into a pyramid rather than opening up all three.  From there you can keep opening up the pyramid until it's flat again.  Then you can open it up from the other side and repeat the process.  This will lead to the state you described where you had the D and E pyramids sharing a face.  You could have gotten out of this by flattening a pyramid and trying to open it from the former tip of the pyramid, repeating as necessary (and noting that a pyramid won't always open).  If you're just doing pocket flexes, you won't end up messing up the faces when you finally get back to a hexagon.

When you were sliding one triangle between the pyramids, you were doing a "slot flex."  This move mixes up the sides.

However, judging from your final state I'd guess what you did was the "pyramid shuffle."  To get out of that state, you need to do another pyramid shuffle.  Start by folding D2 onto D3 to make a pyramid with a flat set of triangles sticking off it.  Now open up the top of the pyramid by folding the pair of triangles labeled A1 and A2 down.  Keep pulling on that corner until B6 is against B3 and C2 is against C3.  Now find triangles A1 and A6 and the point they share with A3.  Grab that point and open it up toward the inside of the A3, A4, A5, A6 pyramid.  Fold together A5 and A6 while opening up a new pyramid with B1, B2, B3, B6 on the inside.  Take the tip shared by B1 and B2 and stuff it into the middle of the "cup."  It should now easily open up giving you all A's on one side and E's on the other side.  This is much easier to show that to describe in words.

I posted a video that shows these flexes on the pentahexaflexagon - http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGQ_I4_N3sE.  In the video, side A is red, B is blue, C is gray, D is green and E is purple.  You can find descriptions of various flexes at http://www.loki3.com/flex/flex/index.html.  If you're going to experiment with different flexes, it's easier to tape the sides together when you first make the flexagon (rather than pasting) so you can easily take it apart if you get too lost.

### Robin Moseley

I love the video that Scott posted!  I would not want to try to write out instructions and diagrams for all those flexes.  I notice the the You Tube views of 635 (and growing) are pretty good for this video.  It will not be viral, but there is clearly interest out there for flexagons.  Yes, there was a typo in the pentahexaflexagon template.  I believe it should now be corrected in the version on my website.  It would not be fun or challenging if the templates were perfect!

### Bob Harris

Thanks, Scott.

The flexes to undo the contraption proved to be my undoing. I believe I made a mistake
along the way and ended up in yet another strange state. Since I had used tape to bind
the last two triangles during construction, I followed your second advice, deconstructed
the beast, and started over.

### Kathy Knapp

Scott,
That video is very helpful.  I have taught the flex, and only the flat state of changing colors.   So what we would have called mistakes, really were just parts of different states!  I need to spend lots of time learning more or at least encouraging the young students to learn more.  I will give them the youtube link and let them be curious beyond what they learned from me.

### Scott Sherman

Exactly.  I'm sure I've just assigned names to flexes people have stumbled across and ignored many times before.  For example, what I call a "tuck flex," Conrad and Hartline in their 1962 paper call a "distortion."  They describe it as "a relatively well known but much dreaded aspect of the flexagon."  Personally I think these other flexes add a new level of interesting states to explore.  Even the simple pentahexaflexagon, with only 7 states reachable with the pinch flex alone, has lots of new territory to explore once you add in more flexes.  And things get even more interesting when you try the flexes on other flexagons, such as the isosceles triangle dodecaflexagon - http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsaEhpDgWd8&feature=channel_page.

I'd be interested to hear what your students come up with...

### Pauline Shreiman

Is there a video that shows how to make one of these? pauline

### Scott Sherman

I haven't posted one.  I doubt there's a video showing how to make an isosceles triangle dodecaflexagon but there may be one showing how to make a hexaflexagon.  However, I do have instructions on how to make that dodecaflexagon (and others) at http://www.loki3.com/flex/dodeca.html.


----
## Enantiomorphism in flexagons
February 11, 2009

### Les Pook

All flexagons exist as enantiomorphic (mirror image) pairs. Some  edge flexagons are twisted bands. A flexagon that is a twisted band must have an enantiomorph because the torsion can be either positive or negative. The two members of an enantiomorphic pair are not usually considered to be distinct types of flexagon but, if they are regarded as distinct, then the enantiomorph of a flexagon with numbered faces can be derived by interchanging the numbers on the faces of each leaf of its net. From a topological viewpoint it is not possible to transform between the two enantiomorphs because this is a 'nonperformable operation'. In other words, to transform between enantiomorphs, a hinge must be disconnected and the flexagon re-assembled as the other enantiomorph.

Some edge flexagons are untwisted bands, that is their torsion is zero. From a topological viewpoint this means that there is no enantiomorph. However, interchanging the numbers on each leaf of a net results in a flexagon that is an enantiomorph. If leaf bending is allowed, transforming between the forms with these enantiomorphic face numberings is a 'performable operation' that can, theoretically, be achieved without disconnecting a hinge. As far as I know, leaves always have to be bent, sometimes severely.


----
## Theory of hexaflexagons
February 3, 2009

### Yaacov Belenky

I uploaded file "Theory of hexaflexagons. pdf" to the Flexagon_Lovers files page. In this article I introduce the terminology that I use (where possible I stick to the terminology that seems to be standard) and prove the first theorem that I announced several weeks ago, namely that for any regular flexagon states (with rotational symmetry of order 3) folded from the same straight strip it is possible to transform one of them to another using a sequence of v-flexes, pinch flexes, rotations and flips, where the length of the sequence is linear in the strip length. My daughter Miriam read a significant part of the article, found several typos and added several notes that may help to read the article. The article is still a first draft; I am intending to add a proof of the second theorem (the same for any strip, with a worse upper limit for the sequence length) and maybe proofs of some statements that ai left without proof in the meantime. I will appreciate feedback and notification of typos and mistakes in the proofs from anyone willing to read the article.

### Les Pook

Yaacov

A welcome, elegant, addition to the literature on flexagons. Your
splitting procedure is equivalent to what I call a main position
link, where singletons are replaced by thick pats from another
flexagon. As you indicate, this sort of approach can be used to
design flexagons with desired properties.

There must be other people who, inspired by Martin Gardner, have
deveoped similar ideas independently. Incidentally, my first attempt
to publish some of my ideas was rejected with the sarcastic
comment 'Who wants to be an expert an flexagons?'. Quite a lot of
people do.

### Scott Sherman

Yaacov,

It'll take me awhile to digest all of that, though it's an intriguing result.  But in the meantime, a couple questions.  What's the intuitive explanation for what a pat formula represents?  And in the proof of fact 29, you state, "Since all segments have odd length..." - why is that so?  I assume this is a consequence of using a straight strip, since it's not true in general.

As to Les's point, Conrad & Hartline's '62 paper also describes a leaf-splitting method for creating flexagons.  As I was thinking about it, I realized it put to rest one of my concerns over different foldings possibly having different twists and hence being inaccessible from each other.  Splitting leaves preserves the overall twist of the flexagon, so, unlike the point flexagons Les & I were looking at awhile back, all edge flexagons have the same twist (once you decide right or left handed).

Of course, when presented with a conclusion like what's in that paper, I immediately start wondering how to generalize it.  Does it work for general hexaflexagons beyond just ones from straight strips?  I would guess you could use the tuck flex in place of the v-flex and get the same results, which would be nice since the v-flex doesn't generalize beyond the standard equilateral triangle hexaflexagon.  So perhaps you could use a combination of the pinch flex and tuck flex on other triangle flexagons in a similar fashion?  And since this result is for "regular" hexaflexagons, what flexes are required in general for exploring all non-regular states, or is that even possible without too much deformation?  Plenty to keep us busy...

### Yaacov Belenky

Les,

I agree  that it is very likely that other people developed similar ideas independently. In fact, I was too sure that's the case, and that's why I never published my results until my daughter urged me to check whether they were publicly known. From a brief review of the results on the Web I received an impression that central points of my theory are not publicly known, namely:

* Alternative interpretation of the Tuckerman traverse as a description of structure of the pats (Tuckerman map)
* Generalization of Tuckerman maps to irregular states (without rotational symmetry of order 3). In this case Tuckerman map and Tuckerman traverse are different - namely, the Tuckerman traverse is a subset of the Tuckerman map consisting of edges covered 3 times
* Description of action of the V-flex on the Tuckerman map (two edge lengths change by +2,-2  - see details in my article)
* The theorems that I recently announced, and proved the first one in the article (proofs of the other two theorems to appear in the next version)

It may happen that I missed something; in this case I'd appreciate if you (or anyone else) would refer me to similar published ideas.

By the way, in the third theorem (all flexagon states, not necessarily regular, folded from a **straight** strip, are V-equivalent) , it comes out that there is an exception - for a 12-leaf straight strip, there are 2 V-classes (and no regular states). For all other straight strips, however, there is only one V-class.

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

1) Regarding intuitive explanation of pat formula. A pat formula is a sequence of numbers corresponding to connecting edges. Each number means, in a sense, what is the "distance" between the two leaves connected by this connecting edge. I can explain the meaning of this "distance" in the following two informal ways:

    a) Let's produce the pat from a singleton by a sequence of splittings. In the first splitting in which an edge becomes a connecting edge, it receives number 1. Any subsequent splitting of a leaf adjacent to this edge increments the number by 1. The final number is the total number of splittings "between" the two leaves adjacent to the edge;

    b) In a regular flexagon state, the Tuckerman traverse includes rotations by 60 degrees. If we look at the maximal subsequence of pinch flexes without rotations between them, 3 out of 6 pat connecting edges will remain pat connecting edges throughout the entire subsequence. In the beginning, one of the leaves adjacent to this connecting edge will be s singleton (in every third of the flexagon); in the end of the subsequence, the other adjacent edge will be a singleton. The "distance" between these edges is the number of pinch flexes without rotations between these two states.

Of course, the two explanations are interconnected.

2) Regarding my statement that "Since all segments have odd length...". It follows from Theorem 1 that states: "If b is the number corresponding to a connecting edge in the strip formula of a flexagon state, and f is the number corresponding to the same connecting edge in the flexagon state formula, then b = f mod 2", and from the fact that strip formula of a straight strip is all 1's. I'll write this statement ("All segments have odd lengths for a flaxagon state folded from a straight strip") as a separate Fact in the next version of the article. If you find any other missing steps in my proofs  please let me know.

3) Regarding your statement that "all edge flexagons have the same twist (once you decide right or left handed)". I did not deal with square flexagons recently, but I remember that a long time ago I did fold a square flexagon which was not twisted at all (an equal number of left and right handed twists).

4) Regarding your question whether it generalizes to arbitrary strips and non-regular states  I know to generalize to each one of them, but not to the both of them combined. Namely, all regular states folded from the same arbitrary strip belong to the same V-class; and all (not necessarily regular) states folded from a straight strip belong to the same V-class  except for the straight strip with 12 leaves, for which it is 2 V-classes! The proofs are a little trickier than the first one, particularly for the arbitrary states; I am adding them now to the article. Speaking about arbitrary states folded from arbitrary strips  it is clear that there are many isolated states from which no flexes are available. Intuitively I expect that all non-isolated states folded from the same strip belong to the same V-class, probably with some exceptions for short enough strips (like the exception of the straight strip with 12 leaves). But presently I have no idea how to prove it (if it is correct at all).

5) Regarding your point about tuck flex instead of v-flex   I think it can work. I want to look into it once I'm finished with writing down my results.

### Scott Sherman

Yes, on point #3 I had overstated my case, so I'll rephrase it.  It looks to me like face splitting preserves twist.  You can generate all hexaflexagons (for example) through face splitting.  Therefore they must all have the same twist (after the first face splitting decides left versus right-handed).  I had wondered if different foldings might have different twists, preventing you from flexing between them.  This would suggest the answer is no.

So perhaps for a square flexagon you split opposite faces at the same time, leaving you with no twist?


----
## minimal slot-flex hexaflexagon
February 15, 2009

### Scott Sherman

Next I wanted to see what the slot flex adds to the mix.  I started with a 5-sided hexaflexagon (from http://loki3.com/flex/braids.html, but numbered 1-5 instead of 0-4), performed the slot flex I showed in the video (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tGQ_I4_ N3sE), and marked every triangle face necessary for doing the flex.  Taping together the triangles that aren't needed (a pair of 5's, a pair of 4's and a pair of 2's), gives you a 12-leaf hexaflexagon.  This is the minimum number of leaves necessary for this flex (though there's another 12-leaf strip that also works).

After you do the slot flex on this 12-leaf hexaflexagon, you end up in a state that allows no other flexes beyond the reverse slot:  no pinch flex, no v-flex, no tuck or inverse tuck, and no pyramid shuffle.  But if you skip taping together the pair of 2's, you can do a pyramid shuffle from here that takes you to a third state.  The only flex you can perform here is the pyramid shuffle that takes you back to the second state.

(Actually, if you use that other 12-leaf strip I mentioned, you can perform the slot flex followed by the pyramid shuffle without having to add a leaf back.  It's identical to the first strip except that you paste a pair of 3's together instead of the pair of 2's.)

The 11-leaf flexagon I previously discussed demonstrates that the tuck flex can get you to states the others can't.  This 12-leaf flexagon shows that the slot flex and pyramid shuffle can open up new states as well.  The minimal 9-leaf flexagons for the pinch flex, v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle are trivial examples where each of those flexes get you to states the others can't, but it's nice to see this in more complex flexagons as well.


----
## Linear time algorithm that decides whether a strip can be folded to a flexagon
March 5, 2009

### Yaacov Belenky

The algorithm described below is another (and less heavy) application of the "strip formula" notation that I introduced in my article "Theory of Hexaflexagons.pdf".

For those who did not read my article: for a strip that can be folded to a flexagon, the **strip formula** is a cyclic sequence of 0s and 1s, each digit corresponding to an edge common to two leaves (a **connecting edge**), where the digit is 0 if this connecting edge and two neighbor connecting edges (the previous and the next ones) have all a common point, and 1 otherwise. Equivalently, the digit is 1 if the four leaves  two before the edge and two after it  form a straight substrip, and 0 otherwise. Splitting a leave corresponds to flipping the two digits corresponding to its two connecting edges, plus insertion of digit 1 between them, which corresponds to the new connecting edge that results from the splitting.

**Definition**. An **even formula** is a cyclic sequence of 0s and 1s with an even number of 0s.

**Lemma 1**. Any strip formula is even.

**Proof**. By induction. The strip formula 000000 of the trivial flexagon is even. It is easy to see that splitting preserves the parity of the number of 0s.

**Definition**. A **signed even formula** G corresponding to an even formula F is a cyclic sequence of 0s, 1s and -1s, where the absolute values in G are the same as in F, and the sign of two non-zero elements is the same if and only if the number of 0s between them is even (in other words, after each zero the sign flips); since we are speaking only about even formulae, it does not matter in which direction we count 0s.

It is easy to see that the signed even formula corresponding to any even formula is uniquely defined up to reversing all signs.

**Definition**. The **weight** of an even formula is the absolute value of the sum of all elements of the corresponding signed even formula.

**Lemma 2**. Splitting of an even formula (flipping of two consecutive digits and insertion of 1 between them), preserves its weight modulo 3.

**Proof**. There are three cases.

1) Both digits flip from 0 to 1, i.e. 00 is replaced with 111. In the signed strip all three new 1s have the same sign, so the weight either increases or decreases by 3, which means no change modulo 3.

2) Both digits flip from 1 to 0, i.e. 11 is replaced with 010. In the corresponding signed sequence it means a change from +1,+1 to 0,-1,0, or from -1,-1 to 0,+1,0; in both cases the sum modulo 3 does not change.

3) One digit flips from 0 to 1, and the second  from 1 to 0, e.g. 01 is replaced with 110. In the corresponding signed sequence it means a change from 0,+1 to -1,-1,0, or from 0,-1 to +1,+1,0; in both cases the sum modulo 3 does not change.

(This lemma, of course, is the central observation.)

**Theorem**. An even sequence of length at least 9 is a strip formula if and only if its weight is divisible by 3, and it does not consist only of 0s. (Well call an even sequence with weight divisible by 3 a **proper sequence**.)

**Proof**. By induction. For length 9 it is easy to see that the only proper sequences not consisting only of zeros are:

```
000000111
000000111
000010011
000011001
000101111
000111101
001010111
001101011
001110101
011011111
```

and that all of them are strip formulae.

Lets suppose that the theorem statement holds for length n; well prove it for length n+1.

First, by Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 properness is preserved by splitting. Since every strip formula of length n+1 can be produced from a strip formula of length n by splitting, and since by the inductive assumption all strip formulae of length n are proper, we conclude that all strip formulae of length n+1 are also proper.

Conversely, let G be a proper sequence of length n+1 that does not consist only of 0s. There are two cases:

1) G consists only of 1s. Lets replace any subsequence 111 with 00' (gluing  the inverse of splitting). Since n9, the resulting sequence F does not consist only of 0s (it includes only two 0s). Since G can be produced from F by splitting, and G is proper, so is F. By the inductive assumption F is a strip formula; therefore G, produced from F by splitting, is also a strip formula.

2) There is at least one 0 (and at least one 1) in G.. Then G must include a subsequence x10 (where x is either 0 or 1). Gluing the middle 1, we receive a sequence F which does not consist only of 0s (because gluing transforms the 0 in x10 to 1). The rest of the proof is the same as in the previous case.

**Note**. For lengths less than 9 there are several proper sequences not consisting only of 0s that are not strip formulae, namely:

```
0101
00111
000101
011011
0010011
0101111
00101101
01010101
```

and one strip formula that consists only of 0s (000000). According to Theorem 1, these are the only exceptions from the identity between strip formulae and proper sequences.

### Scott Sherman

Nice result, Yaacov.  It looks to me like this easily generalizes to other triangle flexagons beyond the hexaflexagon.  The same logic applies whether you start with 000000 for a hexaflexagon, 00000 for a triangle pentaflexagon or 000000000000 for a triangle dodecaflexagon.

I recognize of few of those sequences.  111111111 is the trihexaflexagon, or minimal flexagon for a pinch flex.  001010111 is the minimal tuck.  011011111 is the minimal v-flex.  Or, if you start from 00000, you can generate 001110111, the minimal pentaflexagon for the pyramid shuffle.  Note that a formula for an odd-ordered flexagon (one with an odd number of polygons meeting in the center) may not have a unique weight, but the weights are still equal modulo 3.

Since this result generalizes to other flexagons, I wouldn't be so quick to dismiss some of those other proper sequences as invalid.  111111 is the formula for a 3-sided "flexacup", or triangle tetraflexagon.  You can perform the most basic type of flex on that flexagon, a pocket flex.  01010101 is a 4-sided triangle tetraflexagon.  Though perhaps you would simply consider those as some of the valid sequences you get when starting from 0000, not 000000.

Why does your proof start at length 9?  00111111 is the minimal hexaflexagon for the pocket flex, so you can have a non-trivial hexaflexagon even at length 8.  Though I suppose it also leads to the question of what use is a hexaflexagon such as 0000111, which doesn't allow any sort of flex at all?  I guess those are the sorts of sequences you include in your list of invalid sequences.

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

Other triangle flexagons are a fascinating new (for me) direction that I almost did not start to explore yet (but see below); I agree that it would be very interesting to generalize the results to this area and more (e.g.. square flexagons).

As a first generalization, for an arbitrary sequence of 0's and 1's S let's call any sequence that can be produced from S by a sequence of splittings a superstrip of S. Several particular cases of this definition:

```
Superstrips of 000000 = strips from which an arbitrary hexaflexagon can be folded
Superstrips of 111111111 = strips from which a pinchable hexaflexagon can be folded
Superstrips of 011011111 = strips from which a V-flexable hexaflexagon can be folded
Superstrips of 00000 = strips from which an arbitrary pentaflexagon can be folded
```

Why did I start from length 9? Because I want to prove by induction the characteristic property of superstrips of 000000, and this property holds only starting from length 10, so induction base cannot be less than 10. Yes - I should start from length 10, not from 9, because for 9 there is a proper sequence 001001001 that is not a superstrip of 000000 that I overlooked. In any case, I did not mean that shorter proper sequences are invalid in any sense; my list is just the full list of proper sequences that are not formulae of superstrips of 000000. Sequence 00111111 that you mention is both a proper sequence and the formula of a superstrip of 000000; in this sence it is not an exception from my theorem, and that's why I did not list it.

Let's define **gluing** as the operation inverse to splitting. The from my result follows that if we take any strip formula of length at least 11, and perform a single gluing, then the result it also astrip formula, provided that it is not all 0's. Or, in other words, if it is at all possible to fold a flexagon from a strip, you may fold in as you choose, provided that you never reach an all-zeros state, until you reach length 10; only then you must start being more picky in order not to get stuck. I must say, for me it is an unexpected result. In particular, for superstrips of 111111111 and superstrips of 011011111 I see nothing similar.

For pentaflexagons (superstrips of 00000) the only necessary condition that I presently see is an odd number of 0's. I don't see in what sense you can say "the weights are still equal modulo 3", because when the number of 0's is odd, the very notion of weight seems to disappear - with an odd number of 0's, the sign cannot flip at each 0! Note, for example, that both 00000010001 and 00000100001 are strip formulae of pentaflexagons.
Moreover, for general pentaflexagons (superstrips of 00000), similarly to pinchable and V-flexable hexaflexagons, gluing does not necessarily preserve superstripness, and I don't presently see any simple sufficient condition for a sequence to be a superstrip of 00000 / 111111111 / 011011111.


----
## 11-leaf hexaflexagon
February 12, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I've wondered for awhile if it's possible to flex between all foldings of a flexagon strip, and what flexes would be required if so.  So I figured I'd try a simple hexaflexagon and map out all the possible flexes.  I started with the 3-sided hexaflexagon and added two leaves (for a total of 11) so I could perform a pyramid shuffle on it.

What I ended up with was much more interesting than I expected.  There are two pinch classes of order 3.  You can use a v-flex, tuck flex or pyramid shuffle to transform between the two cycles.  There are two additional states which require a tuck flex to get to.  This gives a total of 10 states, which is more than I anticipated.

I should clarify one detail on the tuck flex.  As I noted before, it isn't its own inverse in general.  Depending on the underlying pat structure, sometimes you can simply flip over the flexagon and do another tuck flex to undo the first one.  But when you can't, you have to perform the tuck flex in reverse in order to get back to the original state.  This is a tricky maneuver, but is doable if you pay close attention to how you performed the tuck flex in the first place.  In this 11-leaf hexaflexagon, the tuck flex is never invertible, so you actually have to include the inverse tuck flex in the list of flexes required in order to freely travel between all 10 states.

In order to reach all 10 states, the tuck flex is required.  There are two "tuck classes" of 5 states each.  To transform between these tuck classes, you can use the pinch flex, v-flex or pyramid shuffle.  Only 8 of the 10 states are accessible if you restrict yourself to just the pinch flex and v-flex.  I have not yet looked into whether these 10 states represent all possible foldings with the same twist.

To make this flexagon, start with a straight strip of 11 equilateral triangles, numbered from 1 to 11.  Fold 3 on 2, 6 on 5, and 9 on 8.  Then tuck 10 under 1, fold 11 under 10 and tape together the outside edges of sides 1 and 11.  (FYI, this final step actually puts a slight bend in the otherwise straight strip.)  I've posted more information at http://loki3.com/flex/diagram/hexa11.html.

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

A nice piece of work, and nice and clear explanations and diagrams on
your new page!

In my notation, the formulas of these states are (the first digit
corresponds to the edge 11-1, the second - to 1-2,..., the last - to
10-11):

```
22111111131 - A,B,C
22131111111 - D,E,F
20111113131 - G
00111313131 - H
02131311111 - I
00131313111 - J
```

(The formulas for A,B,C and for D,E,F differ in the starting point - not
shown here - but not in the digits, as always in the formulas of states
of one pinch class.)

The formula of the strip is the same modulo 2, i.e. 00111111111.

It is easy to see that formulas of any two states connected on your
diagram by green, blue or red edge differ only in two positions - in one
by -2, in the second by 2. That's how v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid
shuffle affect the formula, although the preconditions for these flexes
are different.

Several weeks ago I produced a 65M file with all strip formulas and
corresponding pinch class formulas up to order 18 (total of 5233 strips
and about 3.5 million pinch classes). In this list I have 13 pinch
classes for strip 00111111111 - 10 that you have found, and 3 more:

```
00313131111 - K
00113131311 - L
00111131313 - M
```

Note that in K,L,M digits 3 are only in odd positions, while in A-J they
are only in even positions. It means that any position from K,L,M
differs from any position from A-J in at least 3 places (because each of
K,L,M contains three 3's, and each of A-J contains only 1's in these
positions); it sounds like too much for any conceivable flex. K,L,M
might be interconnected, but I did not see how to flex from to another.

Later it came to me that if you split the leaf 1, you receive the
12-leaf straight strip which has 12 pinch classes, 3 states in each
(total of 36 states), whose formulas may be produced by rotation from
the single formula 131313111111. V-flexes connect between these pinch
classes, but the parity of position numbers of 3's remains invariant, so
there are 2 v-classes; tuck flexes and pyramid shuffles also don't help
to connect them. Only in 13 out of these 36 positions it is possible to
glue the "1" leaf back; out of them 10 (A-J) belong to one v-class and 3
(K,L,M) - to the other one.

What I'm wondering now, is what happens with the 15-leaf straight strip
if we glue two leaves together and receive a 14-leaf strip with formula
00111111111111. As far as I can see, it has 29 pinch classes with 3
states each, plus 48 pinch-isolated states - total of 135 states. In the
15-leaf straight strip all states form one v-class, although shortest
paths are longer than I expected (this is the difficult part of the
general theorem about arbitrary states from straight strips). The
question is what happens with this v-class after gluing one leaf -
whether it remains one v-class and many v-isolated states, or does it
split to two non-trivial v-classes.

### Scott Sherman

Yaacov,

After I sent that message, I had also noticed there was at least one state that was isolated given my set of flexes.  I believe I had found state L listed below, but not the other two.

I'm not sure how to fold a strip based on the formula, so I haven't yet tried K and M.  What's interesting is how two states that seem fairly different can generate the same formula.  State A consists of pats with 1, 2 or 3 leaves.  States B and C each have a pat with 4 leaves.  Yet A, B and C all have the same formula.  So obviously the formula isn't a precise folding definition since every state in the same pinch class (which could be quite a few) gives you the same formula.

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

I want to use this opportunity to clarify how to fold the strip based on the formula. The first step is to switch from the formula to the Tuckerman map. In order to do this, simply draw straight segments with the lengths defined by formula digits. Between segments change the direction is such a way that the two segments adjacent to segment A are parallel if and only if the length of A is even. (In particular, if a segment has length 0, the two segments adjacent to have the same direction, i.e. one continues the other.) For example, if we start from the formula 22111111131 of the pinch class {A,B,C}, we receive the map shown in the attached file ABC.gif. (The distance between 11 and 1 is 2, between 1 and 2 - 2, between 2 and 3 - 1, and so on.) As you can see, the rightmost triangle is covered three times. This means that there are exactly 3 states in this pinch class that correspond to the vertexes of this triangle; they are marked A,B,C. Let's take, for example, state A. The difference between pinch class formula and flexagon state formula is that in the latter 6 digits are marked; there digits correspond to the connecting edges represented by segments that pass through the vertex corresponding to the flexagon state. To clarify this awfully complicated statement: you can see in ABC.gif that 6 segments pass through the vertex marked with A - (3,4), (6,7), (9,10) in the horizontal direction, and (1,2), (4,5), (7,8) in a slanted direction. Therefore the formula of flexagon state A (as opposed to the formula of the pinch class {A,B,C} is 22111111131, where the marked digits are in bold. Now, how do we use this formula to fold the strip? Let's traverse the entire Tuckerman map, starting from A, making a stop in A every time we pass it, and writing down the distances. For example, let's start from A in the middle between 1 and 2, and move in the direction of 2. The distances are: 1 from A to 2; 1 from 2 to 3; 1 from 3 to A. Stop and write it down: 111. 0 from A to 4; 0 from 4 to A - write 00. 1 from A to 5; 1 from 5 to 6; 1 from 6 to A - once more, 111. 0 from A to 7; 0 from 7 to A - once more, 00. 1 from A to 8; 1 from 8 to 9; 1 from 9 to A - once more, 111. Now, something new: 2 from A to 10; 1 from 10 to 11; 2 from 11 to 1; 1 from 1 to A - write 2121. These are pat formulas: (111)(00)(111) (00)(111) (2121), or, after a rotation (in order to start from the edge connecting leaves 11 and 1), 21)(111)(00) (111)(00) (111)(21. If you replace each x)(y with x+y, you receive the original flexagon state formula 22111111131. Each of pat formulas in the parentheses is represented by a part of the Tuckerman map starting and ending in A. 00 means singleton - there are two singletons, corresponding to leaves 4 and 7. 111 is a single triangle meaning one splitting, i.e. a pat of thickness 2. There are three such pats - leaves 2 and 3 folded together, 5 and 6 folded together, 8 and 9 folded together. The last one is 2121 represented by two triangles. We'll start folding from the one farthest from A (the leftmost one in ABC.gif). It represents leaves 10 and 11 folded together. After that, fold (10 11) with 1. These are exactly your instructions how to fold A from the strip. (Of course, I went in the opposite direction - from your instructions to the formula.) Formulas of B and C just have different marked digits - 22111111131 and 22111111131, or equivalently, different subdivision to pats - 22)(00)(111) (00)(111) (00)(131 and 221)(00)(111) (00)(111) (00)(31.
I hope this clarifies how the flexagon state formula gives a precise folding definition. And sharing the same pinch class formula / Tuckerman map among all flexagon states of a pinch class is for me a fascinating way to represent in a simple form / visualize the invariant property of a pinch class.
See in my article how to find the faces of a flexagon state from its Tuckerman map.

### Scott Sherman

That takes a little while to digest.  So if I understood that, state K is 1 2 (7 4 3 6 5) 8 (10 9) 11, yes?

I assume that your observation that the v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle all change two positions in the flexagon formula by -2 and 2 is why you felt you wouldn't gain anything by considering more than the v-flex.  But since the preconditions for the flexes are different (as you mentioned earlier), it looks to me like they're not really interchangeable, that each of the flexes could allow you to get to a state the others might not.

### Yaacov Belenky

I'm writing a program to gather some experimental data regarding V-, tuck- and pyramid-classes for arbitrary strips.

### Scott Sherman

I'll think about your questions some more, but here's a quick response to one of them.  The prerequisite for doing a pyramid shuffle seems to limit it more than the v-flex or tuck flex, so it might not open up as many possibilities as the v-flex and tuck flex.  I would expect the tuck flex and v-flex to be fairly interchangeable however.  I was actually surprised that the minimal flexagon for the v-flex had 9 leaves, just like the minimal pinch flex and tuck flex flexagons.

### Yaacov Belenky

Yes, I know how many pinch classes there are in the 6-sided hexaflexagon from a straight strip. There are 1,136 pinch classes, out of them 2 contain 9 states, and every other - 3 states, total of 1,134*3+2*9=3,420 states, which matches Bruce's result. I also know how many pinch classes can be folded from any other strip that contains up to 18 leaves, the maximal number being 2,102 for the 18-leaf strip with formula 011011011111011111. (I am not sure, however, that the total number of states is greater, because many of its pinch classes are trivial.)

I also checked my hypothesis for all states up to 18 leaves. After I uploaded my message as a file, I found that I was mistaken thinging that I found multiple V-classes containing pinchable states folded from the same strip. I erroneously thought that pinch class is non-trivial if and only if its formula contains zeros. Actually, it works only in one direction - a pinch class with a zero in its formula is trivial, but not vice versa. After I discovered this mistake, I added a check into my program, so that it signals every time when there is a strip for which more than one V-class contains pinchable states. Out of thousands of strips, there is only one such strip - the straight 12-leaf strip! So I am pretty sure now that the hypothesis (with this only exception) is true, but still don't know to prove it.

For the v-flex, I know to prove that any non-trivial pinch class is v-flexable, except for the minimal non-trivial pinch class (the trihexaflexagon). I still did not look into the other flexes.

On another topic - do you know whether a linear time algorithm is known that for an arbitrary strip decides whether a flexagon can be folded from it?

### Scott Sherman

Hmmm, I haven't seen anything where the goal was simply to decide if a flexagon can be folded from an arbitrary strip.  The techniques I've tried have generally been about figuring out exactly *how* to fold a flexagon from a strip, which wouldn't be able to answer the existence question in linear time.  Maybe someone else knows...?

### Yaacov Belenky

Yes, K is 1 2 (7 4 3 6 5) 8 (10 9) 11.

Yes, you are right - the same changes by 2 and -2 are the reason why I considered these flexes (not including the slot flex!) equivalent. Your minimal flexagons (that I did not really study yet, but hope to soon) show that the flexes are not interchangeable, and each one adds more states into the class.

On the other hand:
1) In your platonic flexagon (I like this idea; I also thought about it but never verbalized it) they are equivalent;
2) In the flexagons from straight strips v-flex in enough alone; I guess that any of {tuck flex, pyramide shuffle} is anough alone as well, but I never really looked into it;
3) In other kinds of flexagons they are not equivalent,but the states reachable by one of them but not by others are very far from regular states and somehow look less interesting to me (of course, it is already issue of personal taste). I wonder whether the following statement is true: if A and B are pinchable states (i.e. at least one pinch flex from each one), and if A and B are in the same v-class, then they are in the same tuck-class/pyramide class, and vice versa - in other words, the three flexes are equivalent for pinchable positions. Do you have a counterexample for this statement?

### Scott Sherman

After looking at various hexaflexagons, I would guess your conjecture in #3 is probably correct.  The 11-leaf hexaflexagon I posted is the unique minimal flexagon that allows both the pinch flex and pyramid shuffle, and even it allows you to use any of those (2,-2) flexes to travel between the two pinch cycles.

Though it's interesting to note that there are two ways to tuck flex between ABC and DEF, one way to v-flex and one way to pyramid shuffle.  Overall in the state diagram, you can see 10 tuck flexes, 6 pinch flexes, 3 v-flexes and 2 pyramid shuffles.

As to why I find all the states interesting, I think of many flexagons as a puzzle akin to a Rubik's cube where you can "mess it up" with a series of flexes and try to put it back together again.  I tried a slot flex on the straight-strip 6-sided hexaflexagon and found that I could reassemble the sides through a series of tuck flexes and pyramid shuffles.  Is this always possible?  Anything we can learn about what flexes do and how you can transform between various states and classes is interesting for knowing what's possible to "fix".  Knowing there's a sense in which the v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle are equivalent is interesting.  Knowing that some states are completely inaccessible is interesting.  This is analogous to the states in a Rubik's cube that you can't get to without taking apart the cube.


----
## Characterization of strips from which a pinchable flexagon can be folded
March 12, 2009

### Yaacov Belenky

In continuation of the thread "Linear time algorithm that decides whether a strip can be folded to a flexagon", I folund a necessary and sufficient condition for a possibility to fold a pinchable flexagon from a strip. For the strip formula definition, see that thread or my article. In order to formulate the condition, I need two definitions:

**Definition 1**. If x[0..n-1] is a cyclic sequence of zeros and ones with an even number of zeros, then its skew is the number calculated by the following pseudocode:

```
skew=0
sign=1
for i=0..n-1
   if x[i]=1
      skew=skew+sign
   else
      sign=-sign
if skew<0
   skew=-skew
```

It is easy to show that cyclic permutations of the sequence preserve the skew (assuming that the number of zeros is even). (That's what in the previous thread I called weight; but this value does not behave as a weight, and I want to use the word weight for something more appropriate,)

**Definition 2**. If x[0..n-1] is an arbitrary cyclic sequence of zeros and ones, its **weight** is calculated as follows:

```
Find all maximal subsequences consisting only of ones;
The weight of each such subsequence is the number of ones in it, divided by 2, rounded up to an integer;
The weight of the sequence is the sum of weights of all maximal subsequences consisting only of ones.
```

For example, weight of 010110111 is 1+1+2=4.

The necessary and sufficient condition is:
1) The number of zeros in the formula is even
2) The skew is divisible by 3
3) The weight is at least 5

### Scott Sherman

Interesting result, Yaacov.  I assume your conclusion was based on examining the large number of strip formulas you generated?

You asked about whether anyone had verified your previous proofs.  I've made it part way through and asked questions on a couple of areas I found unclear.  But I haven't made it through everything, so I haven't succeeded in verifying the proofs.  Hopefully one of these days I'll dig back in and see what I find.

### Yaacov Belenky

My conclusions were indeed inspired by the experimental results that helped me to find the three relevant invariants (number of zeros modulo 2, skew modulo 3, and weight); after the invariants have been found, it was not difficult to prove the results by induction,

By the way, while the minimal pinchable flexagon is folded from the only 9-leaf strip with weight 5, the minimal v-flexable flexagon and the minimal tuckable flexagon are folded from the only 2 (up to the order) 9-leaf strips with weight 4. Speaking about v-flexable and tuckable strips (i.e strips from which it is possible to fold a v-flexable/tuckable flexagon): the tuckable strips are all strips with weight at least 4, except for a finite number of them. For v-flexable strips, there is an infinite family of weight 4 non-tuckable strips; I believe there is a fourth invariant that can explain it, but I did not continue in this direction.


----
## HOMAGE TO A PIED PUZZLER now available
March 31, 2009

### Ann Schwartz

HOMAGE TO A PIED PUZZLER is now available through Amazon. Published by A K Peters, this book has a chapter by Jeff Rutzky and me on the hexa-dodeca- flexagon. There is also one by Jean Pedersen and Peter Hilton, and many other interesting chapters.

The pied puzzler in the title is Martin Gardner.

The URL for the book is http://www.amazon.com/Homage-Pied-Puzzler-Pegg-Jr/dp/1568813155/ref=pd_bbs_sr_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1238

The book isn't cheap, but the handy "search inside" feature applies to the title, so you can browse through the book.

To Les Pook especially: I write about flexing on four creases at once, which brings up triangles from three different faces at once and arranges them in a symmetrical pattern; and also how the object can open up into a large parallelogram (which flexes) and some other not-so-obvious maneuvers. They can be made when the flexagon is made from a straight strip--I don't think you can produce the parallelogram without it. I don't think the article you sent me about the hexa-dodeca had these manipulations in it.


----
## video: decadecaflexagon
March 22, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I've posted a new video showing some interesting flex sequences on the 10-sided isosceles triangle decaflexagon, including...

* ..a flex I call the "flip flex"
* A variation of the pinch flex where you pinch 3 of the 10 hinges on the decaflexagon
* A sequence of flexes that swap out a single leaf on one side, while the other 19 leaves remain in place.  The sequence can be performed on other triangle flexagons, including the hexaflexagon.
* A demonstration that, between the two sides, you can see leaves from all 10 sides at once.  There are probably many other interesting ways to accomplish this.

You can find the video at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=COtfw9-UvJY.  The strip to fold this flexagon can be found among my other decaflexagons at http://loki3.com/flex/deca.html.

### Pauline Shreiman

this group is definately not for beginners. it is for experienced

### Scott Sherman

Certainly some of the posts can get pretty advanced, but there has actually been quite a mix.  People are most likely to post new discoveries of course, which almost by definition is more advanced.  And where else could you have a conversation on flexagon theory?

But there are some good examples of posts that don't require as much background.  For example, Robin Moseley has posted a series of interesting patterns he has created on hexaflexagons.  He also has several dodecaflexagons plus a video showing a series of flexes if you want to try something more challenging.  You can find these at http://www.flexagon.net/.  Ann Schwartz has a series of articles on a variety of topics, including several on flexagons at http://www.eighthsquare.com/.

I started from the assumption that most people who joined this group already learned about hexaflexagons from one of the many websites that describe them or from some form of Martin Gardner's articles.  So I posted about an interesting assortment of other types of flexagons made from triangles and put them at http://loki3.com/flex/triangles.html.  Many of these aren't much more difficult than the hexaflexagon, though you may need other flexes for some of them.  I tried describing them in words and pictures at http://loki3.com/flex/flex/index.html.  But it really helps to see these flexes in action, so recently I've posted a series of videos.  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsaEhpDgWd8 demonstrates some of the flexes I take for granted the decadecaflexagon video, for example.  Some of my others focus on showing some of the other basic flexes.  But with this last video, I intentionally showed a more complex flexagon and more complex sequences to give people an idea of some of the more advanced possibilities.

But I only know when my explanations are unclear or if I'm leaving out important steps when I get feedback.  On a previous video, Pauline had asked if there was a video showing how to make the flexagon being demonstrated, so I've started including the folding steps in my videos.  With this last one, it takes long enough to fold it that I didn't include the whole process.  I tried to show enough that you get a feel for how to proceed.

I'm sure other people have some interesting examples as well.  Or questions and comments...

### Yaacov Belenky

Scott,

A great video! That's the first time I folded a flexagon from non-equilateral triangles and did a 3-3-4 pinch flex. Looks like Tuckerman map still makes sense while Tuckerman traverse does not (i.e. the map cannot be traversed - there is no analogue of the regular pinch flex). The compact strip formula is 0111101111, and the compact flexagon state formula (as it is folded in the video) is 2133321333. Here red means a short connecting edge, and bold means, as usual, a pat connecting edge - which, of course, cannot be short (or can it?). I need to draw it to explain more; hope to do it in the next message. The 3-3-4 pinch flex seems to increase 3 intervals on the Tuckerman map by 2, and decrease other 3 intervals by 2.

Pauline,

The video is indeed a little fast, but fortunately it is possible to stop and rewind it. It is my first experience with decaflexagons, and it took some time, but I managed to reproduce the folds from the video. Where did you experience problems - with folding or with flexing?
This is AFAIK the only active flexagon forum, and it is meant for beginners as well as for more experienced people.

Everybody,

My "Theory of Hexaflexagons" has been posted about a month and a half ago. Since then I proved several more general theorems; the last one says that, using pinch flexes and v-flexes, it is possible to move from any pinchable state to any other pinchable state folded from the same strip with the same handedness, with the only exception for the 12-leaf straight strip. The proof, however, is significantly trickier than for my first theorem. I would like to receive some feedback before I start to write down proofs of the most general and other theorems. Those who started to read the article - how far did you get? Was anything unclear? Did anybody verify my proof?

### Les Pook

Pauline

I agree that some postings are for the experienced, but we do try to help newcomers. Have you any specific questions that you would like answered?

Martin Gardner's recent book Hexaflexagons, probability paradoxes, and the Tower of Hanoi. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008, is a good introduction to flexagons. My own book Flexagons inside out. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003, is written with beginners in mind. I have another book, coming out later this year, which includes some more recent developments, up to about the end of last year.

### Pauline Shreiman

thanks, I appreciate your help

### Robin Moseley

As Scott mentions about my website, www.flexagon. net, I have posted downloadable templates for several of the traditional flexagons that started this great flexagon movement.  These are displayed on my home page and can get anyone started without any background.  I have also tried to detail the multi-sided variations that grow from the traditional tri-hexaflexagon.  I have enjoyed these variations for many years and still have fun desiging and folding them as much today as I did when in college many years ago.  These are the flexagons invented by the Princeton Flexagon Committee which was founded in 1939 and which actually has a myspace group:

http://www.myspace.com/flexagoncommittee

I get email all the time from teachers and others that use my basic flexagon patterns in classes and activities from high school to college activities.  I recently even had a graphic arts college professor contact me with interest in some of my templates for her classes and an upcoming textbook.  Flexagons have a broad range of aspects that expand beyond just the mathematical properties which certainly have been one of the reasons for the continued interest in them. For example, I know that many people, including myself, have used flexagons as business cards.    If there are other beginners lurking out there, don't be intimidated by the more advanced posts, I believe everyone here welcomes discussion at all levels.  There is no other group like this on the Interent, so we need to support all levels of discussion!


----
## video: silver octaflexagon
April 16, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I've posted a new video showing some of the interesting flexes you can do on a silver octaflexagon, aka silverflexagon or 8-gon.  It's folded from 45-45-90 ("silver") triangles and all the 90 degree angles open up lots of possibilities.  This is definitely a fun flexagon to play around with.  You can watch the video at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6dJxwMXdv88.  I've posted the template for the flexagon in the video at http://loki3.com/flex/octa.html, at the bottom of the section on the silver octaflexagon.  I recommend taping it together, just in case you get lost flexing and you want a simple way to start over again.

The video starts out by running through a series of flexes, just to show what you can do.  It then shows how to fold it, followed by several of the flexes in more detail.  But there's more to explore than just what's in the video.  This is an entertaining flexagon to try.

### Ann Schwartz

Fantastic video, Scott.

I especially want to study the flexes that produce mixed faces in a symmetrical fashion.

Dave Mitchell, have you seen this video?

### Robin Moseley

Your videos are really great Scott! I really like this silver octaflexagon and hope to create a graphic pattern for it when I get some time.  This new video is easy to follow and shows the wonderful variety of flexing options.  It would be almost impossible to put this into words.  I believe that once a person has succeeded in creating some of the basic flexagons, this silver octaflexagon would be a good step into the more complex flexagons.

### Scott Sherman

Thanks.  Yes, I think this one would be a good one for interesting patterns.  Whenever I start thinking about decorating a flexagon, I look at it a bit differently.  I notice how faces change orientation and get rearranged as you perform various flexes.  Figuring out a good pattern is challenging.

I specifically chose this 6 sided version because you can do a large variety of flexes from the initial arrangement (1's on one side, 2's on the other), which opens up some intriguing possibilities.  I was thinking of something like an animal mix-n-match, where each time you swap out a portion of a side, it swaps in body parts from a different animal.  If I were a bit more artistic, I might attempt something like that.  Or maybe cut-aways, where you start by seeing the outside of a building for example, and doing a pyramid shuffle would show you the electrical routing while doing a tuck flex might show you the HVAC system and the flip flex reveals the hidden passageways...


----
## Serious fun with flexagons
April 18, 2009

### Les Pook

My book 'Serious fun with flexagons. A companion and guide.' is due to be published by Springer in July 2009. The blurb reads:

'A flexagon is a motion structure that has the appearance of a ring of hinged polygons. It can be flexed to display different pairs of faces, usually in cyclic order. Flexagons can be appreciated as toys or puzzles, as a recreational mathematics topic, and as the subject of serious mathematical study. Workable paper models of flexagons are easy to make and entertaining to manipulate. The mathematics of flexagons is complex, and how a flexagon works is not immediately obvious on examination of a paper model. Recent geometric analysis, included in the book, has improved theoretical understanding of flexagons, especially relationships between different types.

This profusely illustrated book is arranged in a logical order appropriate for a textbook on the geometry of flexagons. It is written so that it can be enjoyed at both the recreational mathematics level, and at the serious mathematics level. The only prerequisite is some knowledge of elementary geometry, including properties of polygons. A feature of the book is a compendium of over 700 nets for making paper models of some of the more interesting flexagons, chosen to complement the text. These are accurately drawn and reproduced at half full size. Many of the nets have not previously been published. Instructions for assembling and manipulating the flexagons are included.'

The book is written in much the same spirit as the Conrad and Hartline report, but I have tried to make the mathematics more accessible. I have included references to some Flexagon Lovers Group postings up to the end of last year, and also to some flexagon videos. Photographs of flexagons are in black and white, but I hope to upload colour versions of at least some of them to my website www.pook.org.uk.

### Ann Schwartz

Congratulations, Les.

Please send the link to Amazon or the publisher as soon as there is one, so I can post it.

I eagerly look forward to reading your new book...and making the flexagons described in it.

### Les Pook


I have checked, and the book is available for pre-order from Amazon at a discount. The US link is http://www.amazon.com/Serious-Fun-Flexagons-Compendium-Applications/dp/9048125022/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1240131636&sr=1-1 and the UK link is http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_ss_w_h_?url=search-alias%3Dstripbooks&field-keywords=serious+fun+pook&x=15&y=16 It is probably easier to use the Amazon search facility! 'Pook serious' works.

The Springer UK link, from which the flyer can be downloaded, is http://www.springer.com/math/geometry/book/978-90-481-2502-9 Chapter summaries will be made available online. I'm not sure when.

### Harold McIntosh

Quoting Les Pook <les.pook@tesco. net>:

> The book is written in much the same spirit as the Conrad and
> Hartline report, but I have tried to make the mathematics more
> accessible.

Ah, yes! that mathematics ...

Who was the ancient Greek philosopher who said that knowing is
not enough; you have to know that you know?

The history of flexagons may be as interesting as the flexagons
themselves, and is vastly harder to reconstruct. But one wonders
whether the same may not be true of any discipline? Anyway, there
seems to be some agreement that what we now regard as flexagons
began with Arthur Stone in Princeton in the late 1930's. He and
his friends evidently discussed and experimented with them at
length. There has been some mention of a written record, but as
far as I know noone has ever seen it. Apparently the group
dissipated with the onset of World War II.

Flexagons were publicized through the Westinghouse National
Science Talent Search, and some written material was created
by participants, but apparently none of it remains. I saw one
document, learned about how to anticipate a flexagon via a
diagram - the trees and triangles and so on, but have lost my
copy.

The article of Oakley and Wisner must have arisen through some
sort of contact with the Princeton group, and it would seem that
having returned to England, Stone must have spread some ideas
about that made their way to publications like Mathematical
Gazette.

Anyway, what knlowledge there was seems to have been extremely
fragmented, and everybody seems to have tried to organize what
knowledge or experience they had in their own way. Myself, it
was natural to try to map a flexagon, but unfortunately I should
have drawn it differently, not getting the dual that I should
have. That really held up my further understanding of flexagons.
I have often wondered if Tukey or Feynman or whoever worked from
the dual, because doing so makes the construction of an arbitrary
flexagon quite obvious.

Oakley and Wisner tried to give a recursive definition of a
flexagon, in terms of pats and thumbholes. Myself, I had just
come from working with Riemann surfaces in complex variable
theory, branch points and covering spaces, which was the origin
of the splitting theory of flexagon construction. Unfortunately
that insight did not extend to triple of multiple splitting for
polygons beyond triangles. Part of what I mean by "knowing what
you know."

Anyway, those ideas were part of what Hartline and Conrad had
to work with. I recall their announcing the two basic principles
of flexagon theory: 1) "any polygon can be flexagonned. " 2) "the
sum of the angles has to be 360 degrees." It was years before I
really understood what they were talking about. Meanwhile
Michael Schlessinger had a viewpoint similar to what was being
published in England along the lines of polygon dissections to
enumerate flexagons. If that was ever written up, it didn't
make it into a RIAS report and if there ever was a copy I've
lost it.

Anyway, this gives some idea of why that RIAS report was
organized the way it was. Everybody was still trying to decide
what a flexagon was, and how to describe it. Tony was quite an
accomplished artist, and there was another student, both trying
to get some informative drawings of flexagons. I wonder why we
never hit on flexacubes? Suffice it to say that it is not such
a trivial exercise to get a good depiction of the workings of
flexagons. In those days there were no videocameras as there
are now, but even so an intelligible presentation has to be
very carefully planned.

Now it is many (45?) years later; thanks to the Internet that
RIAS report has gotten some circulation. In the meantime the
idea of Mandelbrot sets and fractals has become widely known.
True, flexagons have a recursive definition thanks to Oakley
and Wisner; but perhaps such ideas are more familiar and
informative than they were way back then? Then, there was the
decisive contribution by John Conway, that flexagons can be a
permutation stack (look at the stack, not the frieze), not just
a fractal stack (relplace any face by its cyclic complement,
then turn it over = the sum of the angles has to be 360 degrees).

For those who would like an update of the RIAS report, I would
reccommend my "A Quick Flexagon Survey," although I doubt that
it has had much circulation outside of the archives of this
group (or the CIEA). And one can really bask in "if only you
knew what you know!"

### Bruce McLean

How do I get to

"A Quick Flexagon Survey,"

### Harold McIntosh

You could ask Google for it, but that seems to turn up only an
HTML version. It is a little trickier to get the PDF version of
about 37 pages, but I hope the following link will work. I won't
know until I've posted this message, so I hope I'm not repeating
my previous posting goof.

http://delta.cs.cinvestav.mx/~mcintosh/comun/gonafle/gonaflex.pdf

Actually the document should be in the Flexagon Lovers Archives,
but I have never mastered or even slightly learned how to use
Yahoo!, this group or any other.

If you can get into the CINVESTAV files, there are several
flexagon articles and I think, a video or two (in spanish).

Let's hope this works; otherwise I'll be back.


----
## Flexagon archive
April 23, 2009

### Les Pook

There is a Wikipedia entry for 'Flexagon', an archive of nearly 600 postings at the Flexagon Lovers Group, and Googling 'flexagon*' results in 13,700 hits. From recent Flexagon Lovers Group postings it is clear that some sort of index to significant postings in the flexagon archive would be helpful. By 'significant' I mean postings that contribute to the debate, either directly, or by providing links. Construction of an index to significant postings involves both a lot of work and making value judgments. My suggestion is that Members could perhaps compile their own lists of significant postings. My own list is below. The subject lines are not always appropriate since some of the postings are replies. A posting can easily be found once its number is known. It is possible to list postings by a particular author by using the Advance Search facility.

```
280      Pook-A-Gon
282      Pook-A-Gon
297      Point flexagons
299      Alternate face numberings
310      Dodecaflexagons
312      Flexagons inside out  Errata
316      Point flexagons
317      Interleaved point flexagons
323      Interleaved point flexagons
330      Various flexagons
343      Transformations between point flexagons
375      Two hybrid point flexagons
383      Point slipagons
393      Walk through a 3 X 5 card
396      The thrice three-fold flexagon
423      Paper and ink
430      Results of pocket flexes
435      Pentaflexagon puzzle
440      Triangle star flexagons
444      Silver flexagons
465      Flexagon construction procedure
474      Russian flexagon article
481      what is the name of this flexagon and where can I find it again??
487      A Hookes Joint flexagon
489      Hookes Joint flexagons
516      A photogenic point flexagon
518      Meccano point flexagons
526      Transformation between flexagons
534      Transformations between flexagons
559      Enantiomorphism in flexagons
```

### Peter Abrahams

This list has been very interesting to me, though I have had nothing to
contribute yet. I made a few hexahexaflexagons circa 1970, fortunately
I used quality artist's paper & they still flex nicely.
I'm replying to the note about yahoo list archives, and proposals for
laboriously creating indexes to the postings.
Yahoo does a very good job managing these lists, and I am very grateful
that there doesn't seem to be any spam arising from that source. But as
an archive, the yahoo site is far from archival. First, because any
sale of yahoo, or a management decision, could well result in the loss
of all archives. Second, there have been (I've read) groups that were
abruptly closed by yahoo due to conflicts & legal threats. And who
knows how well the archive's electronic files are backed-up and
firewalled, and how vulnerable the archives are to the usual electronic
threats.
Those who find the archives useful should certainly save all the
messages they need, to their personal computer. That will do more than
anything to ensure that the information is available in decades to come.


----
## describing flex sequences
April 28, 2009

### Scott Sherman

As I play around with different sequences of flexes, I find that I need a way to describe them without having to resort to making a video.  So what follows is a simple notation for describing a sequence of flexes.

Individual flexes are represented with letters, e.g. P for a pinch flex and T for a tuck flex.  Flexes are done relative to the current side and vertex, with ^, > and < used for describing how to flip and rotate the flexagon.  Thus you can write P^>T to represent the sequence:  pinch flex, turn over the flexagon, rotate one vertex to the right, and finish with a tuck flex.  The following lists some of the symbols:

    ^     Turn the flexagon over while keeping the same current vertex.
    <     Step one vertex counterclockwise (left if vertex is at the top).
    >     Step one vertex clockwise (right if vertex is at the top).
    P     Pinch flex
    T     Tuck flex
    S     Pyramid shuffle
    V     V flex
    F     Flip flex
    R     Silver tetra flex

`A x n` means perform flex `A` n times.  `A'` means perform flex `A` in reverse.  `I` is the "identity flex", i.e. the flexagon remains unchanged.  Thus `I=AA'` and `(AB)'=B'A'`.  From here you can draw conclusions such as saying if `I=ABC` then `B=A'C'`.

So now if I find that the sequence `VT^P^` leaves a hexaflexagon unchanged, I can write this as `I=VT^P^`.  I can then describe each flex in terms of the other two.  `V=P^T^`,  `T=^V^P`, and  `P=TV`.

At http://loki3.com/flex/flex/notation.html you'll find a more complete description of the flex notation plus a collection of interesting flex sequences.  Many of these sequences work on a wide variety of triangle flexagons, from the hexaflexagon to the dodecaflexagon and many others.

### Yaacov Belenky

A good notation; I adopted it in my script http://flexagon.vlexo.net/scripts/FlexagonSimulator.cgi. I was recently thinking in a similar direction in connection with your platonic flexagon. Actually flexagons define a (non-commutative) group, but in a slightly more complicated way than, for example, Rubik's cube. In Rubik's cube, all transformations are possible in all states, and the group of all transformations is easily defined. In the case of flexagons, for any given flexagon there are (infinitely) many sequences that are simply impossible; you need the platonic flexagon to make all them possible. However, a sequence of transformations that is possible and gives an identity transformation in some flexagon, will give an identity transformation in any flexagon in which it is possible. So we can introduce a group generated by different flexes and rotations, with identities defined by such sequences. The interesting question is to find a minimal set of generators and identities that define this group. The following set of generators is sufficient: ^,<,P,V. (> is obviously not necessary.) I guess V can be replaced with any of {T,S,F,R} but did not look into it.
I hope my script will help to explore this area.

### Les Pook

A good idea that could easily be extended to other types of flexagon and flexes. This is a significant posting of permanent interest which I have added to my list of flexagon references and printed out for my own archive.

### Robin Moseley

I agree with Les, this is an important new concept in representing flexagon sequences.  This provides a great way to describe permutation cycles.  Each of these symbols can be considered to be generators.  Combinations of symbols or generators comprise a group that acts on a flexagon.  Finding all possible operators on the flexagon by combining sequences of these generators will describe all possible faces that can be obtained and how to get from one to the other.  For example;  for flexagon maps that can be folded in different ways, we can describe an operator or sequence of generators that will transition a flexagon from one folding to the other.   This new symbol representation provides a mathematical framework for us to use group theory to analyze flexagons.  Each flexagon has a set of operators, generators and groups that describe it.

### Scott Sherman

Exactly - exploring flexagons using these various flexes is similar to applying group theory to a Rubik's cube but more complex, since the internal structure changes with each flex and hence which flexes are possible keeps changing (since platonic flexagons are in short supply).

I'm interested in exploring how various flexes are related or equivalent.  There are a couple cases I know of where different flexes have a certain type of equivalence.  For example, pocket flexes and the pinch flex are completely equivalent (if you use a series of pocket flexes that return you to a hexagon, or similar base state in other triangle flexagons).  The silver tetra flex is equal to two inverse tuck flexes (though sometimes a silver tetra is possible when a pair of inverse tucks is not).

Something I've found interesting is that so far I haven't been able to write P, V, T, S or F in terms of just *one* other flex.  I suspect it's not possible though I don't have a proof.

### Scott Sherman

Yes, it should extend fairly easily to other types of flexagons and flexes - the standard flex of square flexagons, box flex, interleaf flex and twist flex (using some names from Les's Flexagons Inside Out).  The standard flex of flexagons made from pentagons, hexagons, etc. looks like the pivot flex on star triangle flexagons.  The snap flex would simply be stepping by one vertex and doing another pivot.  The scheme of using > and < to change the current vertex might need to be extended to support interesting flexes on compound rings if simply specifying the vertex on the outside of the ring proves to be insufficient.

I was figuring once we had a large number of flexes, we'd need to use two letter abbreviations for some, sort of like the abbreviations for elements.  Then I suppose we need a Periodic Table of Flexes as well...

### Yaacov Belenky

**Robin**,

While I agree with you generally regarding the connection to the group theory (see my message #604), I think that there is only one sensible "flexagon group" that describes the platonic flexagon introduced by Scott; I don't see any other group corresponding to any real flexagon, for the following reason. Let's say we have such a group; its elements probably correspond to transformations (i.e. sequences of flexes), and the group operation ("multiplication" ) - to composition of transformations. So if I apply group element xy to a flexagon state A, then I have to first apply y and get to B=yA, and then apply x and get to C=xB=xyA. But the set of possible transformations in A and in B is always different, while for a group I would expect this set in either A or B to be the same (the entire group). This is different from Rubik's cube in which the set of possible transformations is the same in every position, and therefore group theory can be applied in a straightforward manner. The platonic flexagon is, by definition, an imaginary flexagon for which any sequence of flexes is possible in any state, so for it group theory does work.

Regarding what you write "for flexagon maps that can be folded in different ways, we can describe an operator or sequence of generators that will transition a flexagon from one folding to the other" - I am going to add to my new flexagon script http://flexagon.vlexo.net/scripts/FlexagonSimulator.cgi the following new features:
1) Enter a flexagon state formula and a sequence of flexes, and get the sequence of flexagon state formulas that describe intermediate and final states, or a message that the sequence cannot be performed in this state;
2) Enter two flexagon state formulas corresponding to flexagons folded from the same strip, and receive a sequence of flexes that transforms one to another, or a message that there is no such way. (Presently I know to do it only if both states are pinchable.)

**Scott** -

Taking into account possible development into group theory directions, I find notation "<", ">" and "^" inconvenient, since it is customary to use letters rather than special symbols to denote group elements. I would suggest "R" for "Step one vertex clockwise ", "L" for "Step one vertex counterclockwise" , and "U" ("upside down") for "Turn the flexagon over while keeping the same current vertex". The problem is that you already used "R" for "Silver tetra flex". If you prefer other letters, it's fine with me, as long as there are no special symbols.

### Robin Moseley

You make a good point.  Group theory may not be useful for flexagons as it is for Rubik's cube.  I will be very interested to see your script enhancement that will be able to define a sequence of flexes transforming from one flexagon state to another.  Your web tool is quite interesting.

### Scott Sherman

I chose the ><^ notation specifically because it's easy to distinguish a flex from simply orienting the flexagon and because it's very obvious what the symbols stand for.  I can look at a long flex sequence and quickly see exactly how many flexes it contains.  Yes an orientation move follows the same rules as a flex (other than the fact that an orientation move is always possible of course), but I actually find it quite useful to differentiate the two.  I'm unclear as to why the symbols would present problems in relation to group theory.  Perhaps RLU could be reserved as an alternate way of specifying those moves, but I think ><^ makes for a more intuitive notation when you're simply trying to describe or manipulate a flex sequence.

Though the next thing I was wondering was just how many different flexes there are.  As far as I know, no one has made an extensive survey of all the possible flexes on all the possible flexagons.  Will we run out of letters?  Or will we have to resort to having random letters stand for new flexes?  Even with the small number of flexes I assigned letters to, I had to resort to some being less obvious.  I was wondering if it might be useful to have a pair of letters serve as an abbreviation, but that really would be a bit inconvenient given the standard notation of group theory.

### Yaacov Belenky

I accept your suggestion to have two alternative representations - ">" or "R", "<" or "L", "^" or "U". Actually I would prefer to call "^" "Flip" rather than "Upside down", but since you already called one of flexes "Flip flex", let it remain so.

Regarding group theory and special symbols - of course in mathematics one can introduce any notation he likes. But an equation like <-1=> does look very cryptic and misleading, at least to me; L-1=R looks much more understandable.

However <>^ can indeed be more easily distinguished from letters that represent flexes, so in describing sequences for practical purposes (as opposed to group-theoretic research) this notation may be more convenient. So I'll permit both notations in the Flexagon Simulator, and everyone can use whatever he likes.

Just please change the letter for "Silver tetra flexagon" from "R" to something else, in order to reserve "R" as an alternative for ">".

Regarding letters for new flexes:

In group-theoretical research, R (or L), U, P and V generate the entire (platonic) flexagon group (the question that I already mentioned is to find a full set of relations between them), where V may be replaced with some ot all of flexes from your collection. So any other flex can be represented in terms of R, U, P and V. This representation may fail on a real flexagon, because of some lacking splitting, but since in group theory we deal only with the platonic flexagon, it is not relevant. Therefore I don't think that for group theory we'll need many letters.

For practical purposes (real flexagons), two theoretically equivalent flexes are in fact not equivalent, and a large number of different flexes may be indeed interesting. However, since we are not in the group theory domain anymore, and feel free to use special symbols for rotations, why not use two-letter combinations as you suggest (e.g. a capital letter + a small letter), like they do in chemistry? Inthis context I see no problem with it.

### Scott Sherman

Agreed, <-1=> looks a bit nonsensical as a math formula.  So I've switched the silver tetra flex from R to St to leave RLU as alternates to ><^.  Sounds like a reasonable compromise to allow different uses for the notation.

I think the question of generators for various platonic flexagons is interesting.  RUPV works for a platonic hexaflexagon, but since the v-flex only works on flexagons made of equilateral triangles, that wouldn't apply to most other platonic triangle flexagons.  You could probably replace V with various other flexes, such as T or S.  Perhaps the silver tetra flex would work for a bronze hexaflexagon, but since it's the equivalent of two tuck flexes, it probably wouldn't work for a platonic octaflexagon due to parity issues.

### Bruce McLean

I do not think the following statement is true.

the v-flex only works on flexagons made of equilateral triangles

I named the  V-flex for my students Alan Moluf and Bob Verrey in 1964 (the A in Alan is upside down). I know that is a long time ago and I have not done it since, but Alan V-flexed the square flexagons where the 4 sub squares are each made out of 2 isosceles right triangles.

In a related matter, The European Journal of Combinatorics has accepted our paper that I referred to last December. If I understand their copyright law, I may place a copy of the paper on our web site as well as the yahoo site if there is a link to the journal. 2 of the other authors are students and 1 used to be a colleague.

I will place a preprint at http://math.georgiasouthern.edu/~bmclean/flex/ today and then will add the link to the journal when the issue number is known.

### Scott Sherman

Interesting.  I always assumed the V was simply because of the shape involved.

Ah yes, you can do the v-flex on other triangles flexagons.  I had tried various combinations before and hadn't been able to generalize it.  But I just managed to do it on the flexagon you mentioned (what I call a silver octaflexagon).  The same relationship between the pinch flex, tuck flex and v-flex still holds - namely P=TV - so I know I performed it correctly.  Now I see I can also do a v-flex on the isosceles octaflexagon and bronze hexaflexagon, so it looks like it generalizes better than I had thought.


----
## Relaunched website
April 29, 2009

### Les Pook

I've relaunched my website 'The Les Pook Miscellany', www.pook.org.uk. It is now hosted by Wordpress, and is still being built. I've provided a link to the original version, which will not be updated. At present the articles on the Flexagon page of the relaunched version are the articles that are also in the 'files' section of the Flexagon Lovers Group. I plan to add more flexagon material later in the year, including material on two Meccano flexagons that were exhibited at a recent Meccano club meeting, where they created some interest.


----
## Yasmina Origami Designs House
May 2, 2009

### Hany

I Built Website for video of Origami Page- easy paper folding crafts for children and upload it at
http://origami.yasmina-eg.com

and here other services that I Offer in yasmina website Group such as:

a 360 giga website templete On 9 DVD - web designs- hosting - free Template - paid template - Free hosting - Paid Hosting -
Proxy - Video Clip Music - Learning Photoshop - football sport - English Premier League Goal

http://www.yasmina-eg.com/htmyas/links.htm

Here is a 360 giga website templete On 9 DVD I have just upload :
http://www.yasmina-eg.com/offer/

Remember to tell me about your opnion of this websites,

Cheers,


----
## flexagon generating sequences
May 1, 2009

### Scott Sherman

A **base shape** is a flexagon that doesn't flex. For a hexaflexagon, the base shape is a hexagon made of 6 equilateral triangles (basically what you get if you paste all the hidden sides of the leaves together). It's a collection of connected polygons with the following restrictions: every polygon is connected to exactly two others and each polygon is connected to the mirror image of itself across an edge.

From a given state of a flexagon, some flexes may not be possible due to the current arrangement of leaves and hinges. However, it may be possible to add leaves and hinges to make it so the flex can be performed. This is called **leaf splitting**.

Given a base shape, a **generating sequence** is a sequence of flexes that can be used to create a flexagon. With each flex in the sequence, the necessary leaves and hinges are added in order to make the flex possible.

For example, starting from a hexagon of 6 equilateral triangles, you need to add three leaves and hinges in order to be able to execute a pinch flex. This gives you the 3 sided hexaflexagon. Thus P is the generating sequence for the tri-hexaflexagon. If you add the necessary leaves and hinges to perform a second pinch flex at the same vertex, you have a 4 sided hexaflexagon. Thus PP is the generating sequence for the tetra-hexaflexagon.

Here are some of the generating sequences for hexaflexagons and other n-sided triangle flexagons where n is even and >= 6. See the [flex notation](http://loki3.com/flex/flex/notation.html) page for more information on the notation.

       P              3 sided
       PP             4 sided
       PPP            5 sided
       P'>PP P'>PP    6 sided straight strip  variation A at flexagon.net
       P^>P^>P^>P     6 sided braid or fan  variation B at flexagon.net
       PPPP           6 sided chain  variation C at flexagon.net
       P x (n-2)      n sided chain
       (P^>) x (n-2)  n sided braid

The generating sequences for straight strips are more complex than the chain and braid generating sequences. Define A=P'>PP, B=P'>PPPP and C=P'>PPPPPP. Then the generating sequence for the 6 sided straight strip is AA. The generating sequence for the 12 sided straight strip is ABABA. The generating sequence for the 24 sided straight strip is ABACABACABA. These aren't the only possible generating sequences; the Tuckerman traverse also works for example. But they are the shortest sequences, shorter than the Tuckerman traverse.

Traditionally, hexaflexagons (and triangle flexagons in general) have been generated from sequences of pinch flexes, but that's not a requirement. Some other sample generating sequences:

       T     9 leaf hexaflexagon (see http://loki3.com/flex/flex/tuck. html)
       S     9 leaf pentaflexagon or 10 leaf hexaflexagon (see http://loki3.com/flex/flex/pyramid-shuffle.html)
       V     9 leaf hexaflexagon (see http://loki3.com/flex/flex/v.html)
       F     10 leaf bronze hexaflexagon (see http://loki3.com/flex/flex/flip.html)
       R     10 leaf bronze hexaflexagon (see http://loki3.com/flex/flex/silver-tetra.html)

       T>>T>>T         A 4 sided hexaflexagon with 1 extra leaf
       S>>S>>S>>S>>S   The first pentaflexagon pyramid shuffle variant on the pentaflexagon page
       S^S^S^S^S       The second pentaflexagon pyramid shuffle variant on the pentaflexagon page

I've also put this information up at http://loki3.com/flex/flex/generating-sequences.html.

### Harold McIntosh

Quoting Scott Sherman:

> A base shape is a flexagon that doesn't flex. For a hexaflexagon,
> the base shape is a hexagon made of 6 equilateral triangles
> (basically what you get if you paste all the hidden sides of the
> leaves together). It's a collection of connected polygons with
> the following restrictions: every polygon is connected to exactly
> two others and each polygon is connected to the mirror image of
> itself across an edge.

This latter is what defines a frieze in the flexagon context, the
first requirement making the structure one-dimensional, the second
making it stackable.

What we have here is an interesting idea; defining a zero-level
flexagon and starting a recursive definition from there, rather
than from the first level. Such a zero level seems to consist of
a simple polygon without any structure perpendicular to its plane.
But watch out - five pentagons trying to surround a center and
form a larger pentagon won't lie flat. This presents no logical
obstacle, but it requires paying attention to figures in three
dimensions, not just two. Worse, regular polygons with more sides
and even smaller polygons with large interior angles will have a
non-trivial and even quite complicated three dimensional behavior.

Of course all flexagons have a three dimensional behavior; the
question is whether it can be ignored or the degree to which it
complicates or impedes flexing.

> From a given state of a flexagon, some flexes may not be
> possible due to the current arrangement of leaves and hinges.
> However, it may be possible to add leaves and hinges to make
> it so the flex can be performed. This is called leaf splitting.

More precisely, from the lack of a hinge in a place where a flex
would otherwise be possible. When working with a triangular
frieze, there is one incoming edge and one outgoing edge for
each triangle, so there is only one other edge on which a hinge
could be placed, connecting two leaves copying the one which was
split. Moreover, the copies satisfy the reflection requirement
as well as the linearity (one-dimensional) condition.

However, working with squares does not lead to such a unique
choice; the recalcitrant square can be replaced by either two
or by three joined squares, with alternative joints and in the
case of three new squares, to differing orders in which they
could be folded even after the hinges have been placed.

This leads, respectively, to the barroom door, a square braid,
the classical tetraflexagon, or a tubulating tetraflexagon. So
splitting cannot be a simple operation; the alternatives must
be indexed and one of them specified.

> Given a base shape, a generating sequence is a sequence of
> flexes that can be used to create a flexagon. With each flex
> in the sequence, the necessary leaves and hinges are added in
> order to make the flex possible.

In essence, a serial rather than a parallel, construction for
the flexagon. This could work out, if it doesn't sink in its
own complexity. Which is not to say that other approaches aren't
complex, nor easy to understand.

### Scott Sherman

> > A base shape is a flexagon that doesn't flex. For a hexaflexagon,
> > the base shape is a hexagon made of 6 equilateral triangles
> > (basically what you get if you paste all the hidden sides of the
> > leaves together). It's a collection of connected polygons with
> > the following restrictions: every polygon is connected to exactly
> > two others and each polygon is connected to the mirror image of
> > itself across an edge.
>
> This latter is what defines a frieze in the flexagon context, the
> first requirement making the structure one-dimensional, the second
> making it stackable.
>
> What we have here is an interesting idea; defining a zero-level
> flexagon and starting a recursive definition from there, rather
> than from the first level. Such a zero level seems to consist of
> a simple polygon without any structure perpendicular to its plane.
> But watch out - five pentagons trying to surround a center and
> form a larger pentagon won't lie flat. This presents no logical
> obstacle, but it requires paying attention to figures in three
> dimensions, not just two. Worse, regular polygons with more sides
> and even smaller polygons with large interior angles will have a
> non-trivial and even quite complicated three dimensional behavior.

True, this definition doesn't restrict you to a flat figure, but neither does it restrict you to a simple polygon.  In _Flexagons Inside Out_, for example, Les shows several examples of flexagons that are rings rather than simply polygons.  Such flexagons can be a little more difficult to work with, but seem to follow all the familiar rules of a flexagon.  I find it interesting to think that the same shape that serves as a frieze pattern could also be a base shape for a more complex flexagon.

> > From a given state of a flexagon, some flexes may not be
> > possible due to the current arrangement of leaves and hinges.
> > However, it may be possible to add leaves and hinges to make
> > it so the flex can be performed. This is called leaf splitting.
>
> More precisely, from the lack of a hinge in a place where a flex
> would otherwise be possible. When working with a triangular
> frieze, there is one incoming edge and one outgoing edge for
> each triangle, so there is only one other edge on which a hinge
> could be placed, connecting two leaves copying the one which was
> split. Moreover, the copies satisfy the reflection requirement
> as well as the linearity (one-dimensional) condition.
>
> However, working with squares does not lead to such a unique
> choice; the recalcitrant square can be replaced by either two
> or by three joined squares, with alternative joints and in the
> case of three new squares, to differing orders in which they
> could be folded even after the hinges have been placed.
>
> This leads, respectively, to the barroom door, a square braid,
> the classical tetraflexagon, or a tubulating tetraflexagon. So
> splitting cannot be a simple operation; the alternatives must
> be indexed and one of them specified.

My intention in defining leaf splitting in terms of making a particular flex possible is that this is how you specify which alternative to choose.  You decide that you want a tubulating flex from a particular state, therefore you add the necessary leaves to make that possible.

I was also aiming at increasing the variety of friezes that are considered.  Hexaflexagons, for example, are almost always created with "sides" that are defined in terms of the pinch flex.  But you could instead add leaves simply on the basis of being able to perform a particular sequence of v-flexes.  The resulting frieze would not be part of the standard catalog of hexaflexagons.

> > Given a base shape, a generating sequence is a sequence of
> > flexes that can be used to create a flexagon. With each flex
> > in the sequence, the necessary leaves and hinges are added in
> > order to make the flex possible.
>
> In essence, a serial rather than a parallel, construction for
> the flexagon. This could work out, if it doesn't sink in its
> own complexity. Which is not to say that other approaches aren't
> complex, nor easy to understand.
>
> - hvm

The standard theory for creating hexaflexagons from the pinch flex has been worked out and is very elegant.  I have not yet attempted the same for other flexes, but I would expect such a theory would be more complex.  Thus far I've done a fairly manual process when creating flexagons from a particular flex sequence.


----
## New flexagon page
April 29, 2009

### Yaacov Belenky

I started a new flexagon page: http://flexagon.vlexo.net/. The first thing to put there was a Python script that simulates an arbitrary hexaflexagons. It has two groups of controls: for splitting/gluing, and for flexing. You start from the trivial 6-leaf flexagon and split/glue it until you get the flexagon that you want to work with; then you can flex it using controls < (rotate left), > (rotate right), ^ (upside down), P (pinch flex), V (V-flex) - I adopted the notation proposed by Scott in his recent post. The flexagon is represented in two ways: formula (as described in my article http://flexagon.vlexo.net/TheoryOfHexaflexagons.pdf), and structure of pats (like in Bruce McLean's applet http://math.georgiasouthern.edu/~bmclean/flex/index.html).

Future plans for the site:

    Add all necessary explanations
    Add a script that, given two faces folded from the same strip, produces a sequence of flexes that transforms one to the other
    Add other flexes (tuck, pyramid shuffle etc.)


In the meantime, you are welcome to visit the site and to provide a feedback.

### Scott Sherman

Nice.  I've been sporadically working on something similar.  Functionality I want includes support for other triangle flexagons, having it figure out which faces to split in order to perform a given flex, having it graphically display the current state of the flexagon, and having it create the current strip for me so I can make a physical copy of the flexagon it's generated.

Yaacov, you may also find Conrad and Hartline's 1962 paper interesting if you haven't seen it already.  http://delta.cs.cinvestav.mx/~mcintosh/comun/flexagon/flexagon.html is one place to find it.  They have a notation for describing strips and splitting of leaves that accomplishes something similar to your formulas, though I don't think it lends itself to the same type of rich conclusions you've drawn from your system.  But they have lots of other interesting things to say as well.

### Yaacov Belenky


1) Support for other triangle flexagons - hopefully in the future
2) Which faces to split in order to perform a given flex - a nice idea! Hopefully soon
3) Graphically display the current state of the flexagon - what do you mean? What we see on its face? You can find it from pat structures - just take the first number in every line.
4) Current strip - if you take flexagon formula modulo 2, it is the strip formula; see my article how by a strip formula you can cut the strip. Do you mean, to draw it? What if it has many layers one above the other? I don't see how do I do it...

In the meantime I added two new controls - enter flexagon formula, and enter flex sequence. Explanations will come soon...

Thank you for the link; I did read this interesting article.

### Scott Sherman

While the flexagon formula and pat structure provide useful information, they take a bit of knowledge and effort to interpret.  Thus my wishlist includes showing what the flexagon and underlying strip look like.

3) What I was planning on doing (though it would be much easier for me if I can just convince you to implement my wishlist of features :) is to show what the flexagon would actually look like if you had a physical version of it.  Ideally there would also be a way of labeling the faces, which I can explain by way of analogy.  If you were using a Rubik's cube simulation, would you rather have a list of all the faces with each square numbered or see a graphic version showing everything in its six colors?  The numbers are useful for some things, but a graphic representation would be simpler to interact with, especially if each vertex showed which flexes were possible and you could simply click on a vertex's flex to perform it.  I've generally colored my flexagons based on the pinch flex, and then used other flexes to mix up the colors, giving a similar feel to a Rubik's cube.

4) Yes, I mean draw it.  I've written a program that will take the angles of a triangle and Conrad and Hartline's +- notation as input and create the appropriate strip for me (unfortunately the program isn't really in a state that would be convenient for others to use).  No, I haven't actually solved the overlap problem.  I send the output to a CAD program where I can further manipulate it if needed.  But even showing the strip with overlap would be useful.

### Yaacov Belenky

Regarding (3): I see now what you mean. I think I will add a clickable flexagon in the future, however it is not very high in my order of priorities. I believe that a physical flexagon is much better than any flexagon animation - more so than in the case of the Rubik's cube, because you can see half of Rubik's cube simultaneously, but in the flexagon you see very little - just the upper leaf in each pat. In the real flexagon you can peek into it, and see something from pat internal structure and leaf numbers. In the simulator the "pat structure" table corresponds to it; I don't see a good way to represent it graphically. Do you?

Regarding (4): You write "But even showing the strip with overlap would be useful". Is it (a) a typo, and you meant "without overlap" (if so, I understand your intention - show it if possible, and display a "Sorry" message if impossible). Or (b) you want me to somehow show even strips with overlap? If so, can you send me a sample image that represents a strip with overlap. (Even if you send me such an image, I don't promise to implement this feature, but the chances may grow :).

Generally I think that a physical flexagon is much better than any simulation, and the main purpose of simulation is to help to understand the theory - and for this purpose flexagon formula is much more important than animated flexagon. The mode of use that I had in my mind was: make a physical flexagon, flex both it and the same simulated flexagon, and see what happens with pats and formula. But hopefully I'll add some animation later.

### Scott Sherman

I agree that a flexagon simulation is better aimed at exploring certain ideas rather than provide a full interactive animated experience.  But given the visual nature of a flexagon, a couple of my wishlist items are simply to leverage that.  It also depends on what you would use such a simulation for.  I started working on a simulation because I wanted to be able to specify a flex generating sequence and have the program create the corresponding strip for me so I could make a physical model to explore.  I've done that manually and it takes awhile.

On point (4), I did mean with overlap.  As you draw succeeding triangles that wind around, they may either exactly coincide with previous triangles or overlap in part.  It's still useful to see, if for no other reason than to know you're interpreting the formula correctly when creating the strip yourself.

But I'm sure you've got your own long wishlist as well...

### Yaacov Belenky

I added the second item from your wishlist to my Flexagon Simulator (http://flexagon.vlexo.net/scripts/FlexagonSimulator.cgi) - to find which leaves have to be split in order to perform a certain flex. Now flex buttons (presently, "Pinch flex" and "V flex") are never disabled. Instead, if a flex is impossible, the corresponding button is yellow, and if you click on it, all leaves that have to be split are highlighted in yellow.

I am also planning to add a second button to "Enter flex sequence". Presently, if you click the "Submit" button, the sequence is performed as far as possible without splittings. With the new planned button, first all splittings necessary for the sequence will be performed, and then the entire sequence. If you start from the trivial 000000 flexagon, you receive the minimal flexagon on which the sequence can be performed.


----
## video: bronze hexaflexagon
May 5, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I've posted a video demonstrating a 6 sided bronze hexaflexagon at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IDlTAwMGgCw.  You can find instructions on how to make it at http://loki3.com/flex/hexa.html.  This hexaflexagon is made of "bronze" 30-60-90 triangles.  You start out by folding it into a triangle rather than a hexagon as with the standard hexaflexagon made of equilateral triangles.

I start out by showing what the pinch flex looks like.  When the 60 degree angles meet in the middle, you have a flat triangle and the pinch flex is easy to perform.  When the 30 degree angles meet in the middle, you have a hat which keeps you from flexing through, though there can still be a couple possible pinch flexes.  When the 90 degree angles meet in the middle, you have a flower that doesn't lie flat but allows various pinch flexes.  These three cases are representative of a wide variety of flexagons.

After showing how to fold it, I show an interesting sequence of flexes that leaves the entire flexagon unchanged except for a single pat.  In flex notation, this sequence can be described as `F>T^>>S`, a flip flex, tuck flex and a pyramid shuffle.  (See http://loki3.com/flex/flex/notation.html for more information on the notation.)  I then show how to undo the sequence.

The last bit shows using that sequence three times (`A^<A^<A`) so every other pat is changed.  What's interesting about this is that it essentially mirrors the original strip.  So if consecutive triangles on the strip are originally stacked in the order 124563, after this transformation they're stacked in the order 365421.  From here you can do all the same pinch flexes the original state allowed.


----
## The V-flex
May 11, 2009

### Les Pook

Bruce

Thanks for the information about your paper 'The combinatorics of all regular flexagons'. I've downloaded the paper, and am now trying to digest it.


----
## A sequence for 6-flexagon inversion
May 11, 2009

### Yaacov Belenky

A 6-flexagon from 18-leaf straight strip has just two V-classes with rotational symmetry of order 3. Here is the sequence to flex it from one of these V-classes to another:

    S = (vr)6vpr2uvru(vr)3.

(v - v-flex, p - pinch flex, r - rotate right=clockwise, l - rotate left = counterclockwise, u - turn upside down)
Note that S2=l2.

You can try it on my Flexagon Simulator (http://flexagon.vlexo.net/scripts/FlexagonSimulator.cgi). In order to get to the correct initial state:

    (1) Enter "313131313131313131 " into "Enter flexagon formula" and submit
    (2) Click "Right", "Pinch", "Right", "Pinch"
    (3) Verify that you see the following structure of pats:
    Pat 1 (4 3)
    Pat 2 ((7 8) (5 6))
    Pat 3 (10 9)
    Pat 4 ((13 14) (11 12))
    Pat 5 (16 15)
    Pat 6 ((1 2) (17 0))
    (4) Either
    (4a) Enter "vrvrvrvrvrvrvprruvr uvrvrvr" into "Enter flex sequence" and submit. You will receive a sequence of flexagon state formulae in a separate window,
    or
    (4b) Click buttons one by one ("V-flex", "Right" and so on) and receive formulae and pat structures after each flex.

Of course, for full enjoyment I would recommend to flex a physical flexagon in parallel.

In my article (http://flexagon.vlexo.net/TheoryOfHexaflexagons.pdf) I show that this sequence repeated several times with additional pinch flexes, rotations and flips in between is sufficient to transform any flexagon state with rotational symmetry of order 3 folded from a straight strip to any other such flexagon state (folded, of course, from the same strip, and with the same handedness).

### Scott Sherman

Nice flex sequence Yaacov.  I'll have to give that one a try...

### Yaacov Belenky

By the way, there is a simple proof that the number of v-flexes (11) in this sequence is the minimal possible (assuming that only pinch flexes and v-flexes are allowed). The flexagon formula is a sequence of 18 integers; let A be the sum of all integers in even positions, and B - the sum of all integers in odd positions. In the starting position A=9, B=27, A-B=-18. In the final position A=27, B=9, A-B=18. V-flex is the only allowed flex that changes these numbers. Since a single v-flex changes just two numbers, each one by 2 (in different directions, so that the total sum remains constant), it can change A-B maximum by 4, so in order to change A-B from -18 to 18 at least 9 v-flexes are needed. But it is easy to see that both first and last v-flexes cannot change A and B (because of the rotational symmetry of the initial and final states, the two numbers that are changed are at the distance 18/3=6 from each other, and belong to the same group), so at least 11 v-flexes are needed.


----
## Tetrahedral Kite
May 22, 2009

### Kathy Knapp

Looks like it could be fun to build and fly

http://www.instructables.com/id/Bell-Tetrahedral-Kite/

Bell Tetrahedral Kite

Alexander Graham Bell used tetrahedral kites in the early 1900s to disprove the theory that size detrimentally effected a flying machine's ability to get off the ground. This Instructable will show you how to make your own tetrahedral kite using bendable drinking straws and Tyvek. It's similar in it...


----
## Tuck flex added to the flexagon simulator
May 19, 2009

### Yaacov Belenky

I added the tuck flex to the Flexagon Simulator (http://flexagon.vlexo.net/scripts/FlexagonSimulator.cgi). Scott's identity VT=P holds - wherever "vtupu" works, it brings the flexagon to the initial state.

### Scott Sherman

Yaacov, did you find a way to fit the tuck flex into your current framework of the flexagon formulas and edge weights?  Will it extend to other flexes?  As I've played around with building a flexagon simulator, I've simply gone for a low level description of how a flex works.

It's interesting to note that the tuck flex requires an extra hinge opposite where you perform the flex (as Yaacov has modeled), not because that hinge gets flexed, but because you need to be able to open the flexagon up enough to be able to perfrom the flex.  This is what makes the tuck flex and its inverse not always completely symmetric.  On flexagons with more triangles per side, this restriction is relaxed somewhat in that only one of any number of hinges needs to open up so you can do the tuck flex.

### Yaacov Belenky

Yes, tuck flex fits into my framework, and I believe any other flex does as well. What's the next flex that you would like me to add to the simulator?
(In flexagons with more triangles per side, where any one of several hinges has to open in order for the tuck flex to work, in my framework it will be interpreted as several different flexes - subcases of the tuck.)

### Scott Sherman

Well, you now support what I think of as the most basic flexes on the hexaflexagon, the pinch, v and tuck.  They each require at least 9 leaves for the minimal hexaflexagon.  Since it isn't always the case that T' = ^T^, you could add the inverse tuck, but that's not a very elegant flex on the hexaflexagon.  The pyramid shuffle, requiring 10 leaves, seems like a good next candidate.

It looks like my concept of the "current vertex" would fall between pats 3 and 4 in your simulator.


----
## video: flexagon illusion
May 29, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I've posted a new video at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iDN1Tbsxkec that shows one sort of illusion you can make on a flexagon.  I start out by showing how you can imprison the king by performing a simple flex.  Or, if you happen to live in a country that hasn't made its reputation by overthrowing the monarchy, the end of the video shows how you can free the king.  It also demonstrates how to fold it.

You can find the pattern and folding instructions at http://loki3.com/flex/maze/silver-tetra-illusion. html.

I put this illusion on the "silver triangle tetraflexagon" , a flexagon with four 45-45-90 triangles per side.  This is where I got the name for the "silver tetra flex", being the only flex you can perform on this flexagon.  The illusion works nicely on this flexagon because the faces with the king and the walls are always visible, so you know it's not using hidden faces to accomplish the transformation.


----
## diagramming the 5 sided hexaflexagon
July 24, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I've diagramed all the states you can get to on a 5 sided hexaflexagon using the pinch flex, v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle.  You can find this diagram plus more at http://loki3.com/flex/diagram/penta-hexa.html.

If you use the standard numbering for a 5 sided hexaflexagon, where each leaf on side 1 is labeled 1, each leaf on side 2 is labeled 2, etc., there are 64 different states in this diagram.  If you number each leaf uniquely, there are 178 different states.  I've created a list of the 64 states plus a detailed description of exactly where you perform a flex to get to the different states.

I've also posted a new video, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fY6PTglGMA, that shows how to perform each flex relative to the "current vertex" and how to interpret the flex notation I posted recently.  Hopefully this will make it easier to understand the diagrams since I rely on the concept of the current vertex in my descriptions.

There are lots of interesting patterns buried in there.  States 1, 2, 2', 3, 3', 4 and 4' are simply the normal states with solid colors on both sides.  You can use the Tuckerman traverse to travel between them.  But there are other cycles in there as well.  I'll post more comments on this diagram soon.

### Yaacov Belenky

A nice diagram! Indeed it shows very clearly that tuck flex and pyramid shuffle add a lot to pinch flex and v-flex.

I started to compare it to my results. I counted total of 65 states - 1 more than you, if the leaves are not marked uniquely. If they are marked uniquely, then there a pinch class with 7 states (1,2,2',3,3',4,4'), 6 pinch classes with 3 states in each (each of (5,6,7) and (5',6',7') produces 3 pinch classes with unique marking), and 156 pinch singletons - total of 181 states, 3 more than you counted. The number of states reachable by pinch and v-flexes is identical to yours - 25 without unique marking.

It may well happen that there is a folding of the strip that is unreachable by all 4 kinds of flexes - pinch, v, tuck, and shuffle; that would explain why I counted it, and you did not. I could not yet fully map your notation to mine, so I don't know yet which state you don't have. I'll let you know when I find it. It's interesting whether it is possible to reach it with some other reasonable flex.

### Scott Sherman

Interesting.  I like having confirmation that almost all the states of that hexaflexagon are mapped out.  The 3 missing states when all the leaves are uniquely labeled probably map directly to the 1 missing state when they're not.  Now I'm curious whether I simply missed a state or if it can't be reached with the flexes I used.

I also tried one variety of slot flex without finding any new states, but I'm not yet convinced there isn't another variation that could get me elsewhere.  Or perhaps a tuck flex performed without the flap on the opposite corner (which requires severe bending to do).

I've wondered for awhile if all states of a flexagon are reachable using reasonable flexes.  Now it feels like we're close to having an answer for at least one non-trivial flexagon.

### Scott Sherman

It's interesting to look at how each of the flexes is represented in the state diagram for the 5 sided hexaflexagon.  It may be surprising to see that every state allows either the tuck flex (T) or inverse tuck (T') and that few allow both.  Most of the states, 39 of the 64, allow the pyramid shuffle (S).  But the v-flex (V), pinch flex (P) and slot flex (L) (not shown in the diagram) can be done on very few of the states.  The following lists the number of states in the diagram where you can do a particular flex.

    flex    number of states
    T, T'   64
    T'      52
    S       39
    T       30
    V       18
    P       13
    L       10

On reflection, this overall ordering of how many states support a given flex shouldn't be too surprising.  The tuck flex and pyramid shuffle are local flexes, i.e. they only change a portion of the flexagon, whereas the pinch, v and slot are all global flexes, i.e. they change the entire flexagon.  Global flexes have stricter requirements of the flexagon structure so you would expect them to be possible less often.  The tuck and inverse tuck only change two pats, so they have the simplest requirements, though they also require an additional flap to open up on the vertex opposite the flex.  The pyramid shuffle changes three pats.

So which flexes are required in order to visit every state?  T is needed in order to visit states 26 and 27 among others.  Without T', you couldn't get to state 28.  S is needed or else states 27, 28 and 29 would be isolated.  With T, T' and S, you can get to almost all states, with the exception of traveling between the sets (3, 6, 7', 2'), (3', 6', 7, 2) and everything else.  You can use either P or V to travel between these three sets of states.  Thus visiting every state requires four different flexes, either (T, T', S, P) or (T, T', S, V).

### Scott Sherman

I found the missing state.

I should have made one more prediction about it based on the 64 states I found versus the 65 Yaacov predicted.  The missing state should be its own "complement", as I defined at http://loki3.com/flex/diagram/penta-hexa.html.  That means that if you swap 2's and 5's, then 3's and 4's, it should look exactly the same.  For example, state 16 is its own complement.  It has 113223 on one side and 554114 on the other.  Swapping numbers gives you 114554 and 223113, which describes the exact same state.  If the missing state wasn't its own complement, there would be two missing states that were complements of each other.  This is because of the symmetry between sides 2/5 and 3/4.

The missing state, which I'll call state 34, is very difficult to get to.  You can get to it from state 27 (or 27').  From state 27, find the corner between the pair of 2's and the 5.  You would be able to do a tuck flex here if the opposite corner (between 1 and 3) opened up.  But if you're not afraid to really bend your flexagon (and have tape ready for repairs), with a lot of care you can force a tuck flex here and get to the missing state.  State 34 looks like this...

    124223
    553514

...where the top row goes clockwise and the bottom row counterclockwise (directly opposite the top side).  If you swap 2's and 5's, then 3's and 4's, you'll see that this state is its own complement.  This gives you three states if you uniquely label each leaf.  You can't pinch, v, tuck, inverse tuck or pyramid shuffle from this state.  All I've been able to do so far is the same forced tuck flex that got me here.  A forced tuck between the 3 and the single 5 takes you to state 27.  A forced tuck between the single 2 and the 4 takes you to state 27'.  I don't yet know if there's a more elegant flex possible from here.

Though I'd like to be able to travel to all states without having to damage the flexagon with a forced tuck, I'm still intrigued that I can flex to all the states Yaacov predicts for the 5 sided hexaflexagon.  Now I wonder if this is a general result...

### Scott Sherman

After some more experimentation, I've found that there are several more elegant ways to get to that missing state, flexes that don't require an emergency repair kit, unlike the forced tuck.

I've posted a video showing one way to get to the missing state at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EBv5Rb6tR_8 and updated the page diagramming all the various states of the 5 sided hexaflexagon, http://loki3.com/flex/diagram/penta-hexa.html.  I don't have a name for this new flex, but it's a bit of a mash-up of the inverse tuck, pocket flex and tuck flex.

### Yaacov Belenky

I believe that there are a lot of pairs of states folded from the same strip that cannot be converted using reasonable flexes, and therefore this result can be generalized only in some limited ways (similar to my result that any two pinchable states folded from the same strip can be transformed one to the other, except for the 12-leaf straight strip). Let me suggest some pairs to try to transform between them.

1) The minimal strip that can be folded in more than one way is 8-leaf and has formula 00000101. The two flexagon states folded from it have formulae 00002121 and 20000121. You can find their pat structures using my flexagon simulator (http://flexagon.vlexo.net/scripts/Flexagon Simulator.cgi) (Both have 5 singletons!)
Can anybody transform between them without tearing the paper?

2) For every flex there exists the minimal pair of states (i.e. a pair of states with the minimal possible for this flex number of leaves) that can be transformed one to another using this flex. This pair of states uniquely defines the flex and may be used to describe it. For example, here are the pairs of states for pinch flex, v-flex, tuck flex, and pyramide shuffle..

```
Pinch - 9 leaves
Strip: 111111111
Initial state: 111111111
Final state:   111111111

V-flex - 9 leaves
Strip: 011011111
Initial state: 011211111
Final state:   211011111

Tuck flex - 9 leaves
Strip: 001110101
Initial state: 201110121
Final state:   001112121

Pyramid shuffle - 10 leaves
Strip: 0011100111
Initial state: 0011122131
Final state:   0013122111
```

(Here big read font means an edge connecting between pats; highlighted big red font means an edge connecting between pats in both initial and final states; and bold font means an edge that changes its weight in the flex.)

(The only flex of the above for which the final state is not isomorphic to the initial state, is the tuck flex; that's why it's the only one of them that is not self-inverse. )

Similarly we may define an abstract flex regardless of whether it can be performed on a real flexagon. For example, the only abstract flex with a 8-leaf strip is:

```
Minimal flex - 8 leaves
Strip: 00000101
Initial state: 00002121
Final state:   20000121
```

However even if we add this abstract flex to the set of permitted flexes, there are pairs of flexes that cannot be transformed one to the other. Here goes my second example - 10 leaves, strip formula 0000011011. 6 states may be folded from this strip, with formulae:

```
(Group A)
0000213213
0002213211
2000013213

(Group B)
0000231231
2000031231
2200011231
```

Using pinch flex, v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle, and even if we add the (abstract) minimal flex, it is impossible to transform between groups A and B. To prove it, let's define the distance between two states folded from the same strip as a sum of absolute values of the differences between the edge weights in the two states. Since the sum of weights and their parities are preserved, it is easy to see that the distance is always divisible by 4, so its minimal possible positive value is 4. It is also easy to see that for all the 4 standard flexes - and for the minimal flex as well - the distance between the initial and final states is 4, while the distance between any state from group A and any state in group B is at least 8.

3) For the strip 0001100011 the situation is even worse. The possible states are

```
(Group A)
0001122213
0003122211

(Group B)
2221100031
2221300011
```

Here the minimal distance between groups A and B is 16.

4) Finally, the strip 111111111111 with 12 states:

```
(Group A)
111111131313
111113131311
111313131111
131313111111
131311111113
131111111313
(Group B)
111111313131
111131313111
113131311111
313131111111
313111111131
311111113131
```

Here the minimal distance between groups A and B is 24!

An interesting question is whether there exists a finite full set of flexes (i.e. a set of flexes that make possible to transform between any two states folded from the same strip), and if yes, what is the minimal size of such a set.

### Yaacov Belenky

When I wrote my last message, I ran a program that checked for every strip up to 15 leaves whether there are pairs of states not transformable one to the other using any flexes with distance not more than 4 between the initial and final states (including pinch flex, v-flex, tuck flex and pyramid shuffle). The result was - for 390 strips out of 802, such pairs of states exist.

### Scott Sherman

Yaacov talks about several flexagons in a previous post.  To make it easier for others to try them out, I have templates for some of them available at http://loki3.com/flex/newsgroup/post646.html.  You may not be able to do much with the first couple, but the last one is pretty interesting to explore.

1. Flexagon 00000101 is the minimal flexagon for the "forced tuck" I mentioned in a previous posting.  When you do a tuck flex on a hexaflexagon, the corner opposite of where you perform the tuck opens up to allow you to do the flex.  It then closes back up when you're done without changing.  But on this flexagon, the opposite corner doesn't open up, making it very difficult to do a tuck flex.  There are three ways to do this than I can see:  force it with lots of bending and repair the flexagon afterwards, make the flexagon out of rubber, or trim off the tips of the triangles.  Otherwise this flexagon seems completely immobile.

3. Flexagon 0001100011 also seems completely immobile.  You can do a forced tuck to get between the first and second states and between the third and fourth states (perhaps trimming of the tips to make it easier).  But I dont know how you would get between these two groups, even chopping off the tips.

4. Flexagon 111111111111 has 12 leaves in a straight strip and is much more interesting.  Yaacov, I'm a little unclear on why you say it has 12 states.  It looks to me like each of the states you list is representative of each of its 12 pinch classes, where each of those has 3 states for a total of 36 states.  Does that sound correct to you?  There are two groups of 18 states that each have a very elegant pattern of traversal, but as you suggest, you can't travel between these groups using the pinch, v, tuck or pyramid shuffle.  However, I did find a flex that can take you between the groups.  It's a slot flex combined with a tuck flex, though it would probably be tricky to describe without making another video.

Then there's Yaacov's final question about whether there's a finite set of flexes that work on any flexagon for getting you between any two states.  Considering I needed a new flex to find the missing state on the 5 sided hexaflexagon and yet another flex to completely traverse this 12 leaf hexaflexagon, any such set would have at least 5 flexes in it and probably more.

### Yaacov Belenky

Indeed 111111111111 has 36 states rather than 12 - I actually meant the number of pinch classes. Also, the distance is 12, not 24 as I wrote. I am rather surprised that you managed to flex between the two groups - a video would be great.

Regarding the minimal set of flexes - I realized that it is defined almost uniquely, in the following sense. Suppose we have all "primitive flexes" up to n-1 leaves. (I am speaking about abstract flexes that not necessarily can be actually performed on a flexagon made from paper.) For every n-leaf strip let's check whether these primitive flexes are enough to transform any state to any other state. If yes, this strip does not require any new primitive flex. If not, the set of states is divided to several subsets. Any "flex" from a state from one group to another group is a new primitive flex; for two such groups this new primitive flex is not defined uniquely, but any two such flexes are equivalent up to primitive flexes of lower orders.

However, when I started to search for primitive flexes, most of them look purely theoretical (like 00000101 or 0001100011). An alternative idea, in order to make it more practical, is to limit ourselves to strips with weight at least 4. In this case, 4 first primitive flexes are v, tuck, pinch and pyramid shuffle - exactly Scott's basic set of flexes. And from my experience till now I believe it is fiinite, although I don't know to prove it. I am continuing the search.


----
## 12 leaf hexaflexagon and the slot-tuck flex
August 14, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I found the 12 leaf hexaflexagon interesting enough that I added some decoration to it and posted a video at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hh4mfJDSeNU.  I put a template and further details at http://loki3.com/flex/diagram/hexa12.html.

There are several nice cycles using different flexes - the pinch flex, the S-cycle (using the pyramid shuffle, tuck and inverse tuck) and a cycle of 6 v-flexes.  I created rings using different sizes, colors and linetypes so that you can more easily see how these cycles work.  For example, the pinch flex changes colors but leaves the size unchanged while the S-cycle changes sizes but leaves the colors alone.

There's also a way to traverse all 36 states exactly once, using the pinch flex and a new flex I call the slot-tuck flex.  This is the flex I alluded to earilier that can transform the flexagon between groups A & B from one of Yaacov's recent postings.

I find the slot-tuck flex interesting for several reasons.  One is that it opens up new states on this flexagon.  The minimal hexaflexagon that can perform it has 10 leaves, making it fairly basic.  It's only the third shape-preserving flex I've found that works on the triangle pentaflexagon, joining the pyramid shuffle and the slot.  The minimal triangle pentaflexagon probably has 9 leaves, just like the pyramid shuffle.


----
## Serious Fun with Flexagons
September 8, 2009

### Les Pook

My book Serious Fun with Flexagons. A Compendium and Guide. has now been published by Springer. They have made a good job of it. The book is up to date to about the end of 2008. Some of the material will be familiar to Members from my postings, but much of the material is new. The book includes accurately drawn nets for over 100 flexagons, many of which have not previously been published. The nets are reproduced at approximately half full size. Photographs of flexagons in the book are reproduced in black and white. I have uploaded the original colour versions of the photographs to my website www.pook.org. uk.  See the Serious Fun with Flexagons sub page.

### Scott Sherman

Cool.  Glad to see the book is finally out.  And judging from the color pictures (http://lespook.files.wordpress.com/2009/08/pook-figs-f-c.pdf), looks like there should be lots of interesting flexagons in there.

### Ann Schwartz

"Serious Fun with Flexagons" looks like a fascinating, comprehensive treatment of the subject, a seminal work. I'm including the link to Amazon below. The Amazon page has the handy "search inside" function, so you can explore the book before you buy it.

http://www.amazon.com/s/ref=nb_ss_0_20?url=search-alias%3Dstripbooks&field-keywords=serious+fun+with+flexagons&sprefix=serious+fun+with+fle

And I do urge everyone who can to buy it. It's important that we support each other's publications. I have just ordered my copy, and can't wait for it to arrive.

Again, congratulations to Les.

### Robin Mosely

I finally broke down and bought Les Pook's new book. This book is much enhanced over his first book and the best and most complete information available on flexagons anywhere. Les has pulled together information from a wide range of sources including papers, books, this news group, and other resources on the Internet to create a text book on Flexagons. Unfortunately it has a text book price as well!. For those of you who cannot justify the cost, try to get it from inter-library loan. Everyone in this group would find the book interesting even to just browse through. The varieties of flexagons covered by "Serious Fun with Fexagons" is mind boggling and a great reference for anyone wanting to understand what is currently known about a flexagon topic in order to pursue it further. Even though much of the book is fairly technical, readers can pick through numerous flexagon diagrams to make for themselves and skip all the technical descriptions. One fascinating and challenging flexagon to try making is towards the end of the book and called "The Thrice Threefold Flexagon." Certainly there is enough material in this book to stimulate conversation in this newsgroup for many years to come. Thanks for the great book Les!

### Les Pook

Robin

Belated thanks for your kind remarks. 'Serious Fun with Flexagons' was much longer than originally planned, hence the price. I'm sure that there are a lot more interesting flexagons, and flexing possibilities, waiting to be discovered.

Over the holidays I've reviewed the flexagons that were in drafts of  'Serious Fun with Flexagons' , but didn't appear in the publshed version. None are worth posting: all were discarded for good reasons.

I've made some more Meccano point flexagons, and deveoped a new notation for them. See http://lespook.files.wordpress.com/2010/01/meccano-point-3.pdf


----
## video: enneaflexagon
October 12, 2009

### Scott Sherman

video:  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KVRqS4eDxnk
template:  http://loki3.com/flex/ennea.html

I'm continuing my video series on triangle flexagons with the enneaflexagon.  This one has 9 triangles per face and is interesting because the pinch flex only changes 6 of the 9 pats, leading to a sort of kaleidoscope of leaves as you do a series of flexes.  A single pinch flex changes the shape of the flexagon, turning it into a ring.  A second one restores it to an enneagon.

This behavior of the pinch flex also means that it's a bit trickier to travel between sides than with the hexaflexagon.  In the video, I show a sequence of pinch flexes that can get you from sides 1 and 2 to sides 3 and 4.  I also show a sequence of tuck flexes that can accomplish the same thing.

A short word on the flex notation I use for that pinch flex.  Pinch one corner, step 3 vertices to find the next corner to pinch then step 3 more vertices to find the third corner to pinch.  I represent this as P(3,3), where the pair of 3's tell you how many corners to step to find the appropriate vertices to pinch.


----
## trihexaflexagon maze
October 12, 2009

### Scott Sherman

I just spotted a maze somebody else put on a flexagon - http://www007.upp.so-net.ne.jp/ponmama/hekisagon1.htm.  The site is in Japanese, but there's enough English you should be able to figure it out.


----
## flexagon at Dollar Tree
December 10, 2009

### Kathy Knapp

At Dollar Tree stores, in the toy section is a flexagon.  It begins as a cube, 2 and 3/4" on a side, and made up of 8 triangles, allowing many moves.  It is distributed by Greenbrier International, Inc made in China and has Disney Princess.com , although I could not find it at the Disney site. It maybe just because it has Disney characters on the sides.  The  sku is  3927786720  I am not sure if the 6 way to the left and the 9 way to the right are needed other than some sort of internal check.  For one dollar, it is a great item to play with. There were some smaller ones (2 and 1/4 " on a side)  whose faces are super heros, by Marvel.  It is called a Puzzle Cube, and is the 'regular' cube made up of 8 smaller cubes.

I find the largerer triangular one amazing.

### Bob Harris

I found a similar item at the my local DollarTree, except this one is disneyfairies. com (but same SKU).

Interestingly, I looked all over the store and didn't find it. As I was about to leave, my eye was drawn to some shiny rubik's cubes in the checkout aisle. And sitting in with the cubes was the flexagon you mention. I would never had known it was a flexagon from the packaging though. All you can tell from the packaging is that it is a cube with pictures on the sides.


----
## Season's Greetings
December 19, 2009

### Les Pook

Season's greetings everyone. The Group has been quiet lately so to brighten things up I've attached a file containing a picture and description of a star shaped festive flexagon decorating our Christmas tree. I've also uploaded the file to my website: click the following link.

http://lespook.wordpress.com/flexagons/a-festive-flexagon/

### Robin Moseley

Thanks Les! This was easy to make and a very nice holiday flexagon.


----
## Happy Holidays to all Flexers
December 26, 2009

### Ann Schwartz

It's been a great year for flexagon lovers...lots of interesting messages and a landmark book by Les Pook.

This user groups is growing all the time: we now have 111 members.

May 2010 be filled with new flexagon analyses and discoveries, and good health for us all.
