# Flexagon Lovers Newsgroup 2010

Previous year: [2009](2009.md)

----
## Happy New Year
January 11, 2010

### Bruce McLean

I spent the break finishing a very colorful  hexahexaflexagon applet that was inspired by my colleague, Emil Iacob. We were assisted by students Chasen Smith and John Nelson. I hope you enjoy our applet with 6 colors and shaded corners that demonstrate the 9 mathematical faces using the pinch flex. If you're industrious, you can view the 3420 mathematical faces using both the pinch and the v-flex.

http://math.georgiasouthern.edu/~bmclean/flex/index.html


## The Thice Three-Fold Flexagon
January 28, 2010

### Les Pook

I've received a comment on the Thrice Three=Fold Flexagon. To see the comment, and my response, go to http://lespook.wordpress.com/flexagons/the-thrice-three-fold-flexagon/


## Flexagon with the Christmas Story - sighting
December 29, 2010

### Kathy Knapp

http://www.memorycross.com/Christmas_Craft.aspx
This link shows a Memory Cross in action.  This Christmas, the children at the church I attend, were given a large flexagon / Memory Cross, for them to color, that teaches the Christmas story.

Even blank ones can be purchased.

I just wanted to share this web site in case you haven't seen flexagons in the commercial world being used.

### Ed Hutchins

Structural Graphics has patented this rotating flexagon that has been around a lot longer than they have. How is it possible that they have been able to patent a structure that is not their own intellectual property? Does this mean that other people can not use, teach, or produce this structure without permission from Structural Graphics, including those who used it before they patented it?

### Les Pook

This looks like a version of the double hinged truncated digon flexagon in 'Flexagons Inside Out', p. 88.

### Juergen Koeller

Hello Kathy.
You connect Christmas memories with the Memory Cross. I think of an advertisment of the French cosmetics company L'Oréal and its product Jade.
I describe how to make this simple flexagon on my page http://www.mathematische-basteleien.de/magiccard.htm.
New Year's greetings

### Kathy Knapp

Juergen,

I found a simpler way to construct this flexagon.

http://www.victorineoriginals.com/images/samples/instructions/neverendingcard.html

I think it ends up the same as yours, but the whole paper clip steps can be eliminated.

I used the above instructions to teach it last week at our local meeting,  I was going to use yours, until I stumbled across the above link while searching for the Puzzle Purse, which I also taught.

### Kathy Knapp

Les, I am not sure how I over looked your e-mail, but I am getting to it, and I am sending along a link to this type of flexagon that I taught at our local meeting last week.

http://www.victorineoriginals.com/images/samples/instructions/neverendingcard.html

I have your Flexagons Inside Out, but sadly, most of it is way beyond me, and looking at your reference, the above link is different.

### Les Pook

Kathy

I’ve made up a never ending card from your instructions, and can now see that  is a member of the family of flexagons, first described by Engel, who calls them ‘hybrid flexagons’ I think ‘Hooke’s joint flexagons’ is more apposite. I use this term in ‘Serious Fun with Flexagons’, and describe one on pp. 321-323. The flexagon is also described on my website www.pook.org. uk at http://lespook.files.wordpress.com/2010/01/hooke.pdf

Two more are described, under different names, on pp. 88-89 of ‘Flexagons Inside Out’.

The characteristic feature of a Hooke’s joint flexagon is that adjacent leaves are hinged to either face of an ‘intermediate leaf’’ The hinges are at right angles so the intermediate leaf is a Hooke’s joint. The never ending card is a shape changing flexagon because the hinges are not symmetrically placed on an intermediate leaf.

The simplest Hooke’s joint flexagons have four leaves connected by four Hooke’s joints. A wide range of forms is possible, as illustrated by the four mentioned above, all of which have four leaves.

### Kathy Knapp

I will just have to save up my pennies to purchase Serious fun with flexagons.  I am intrigued and hopefully can keep learning.  Nice to know that the reason the Neverending card works is because of a Hooke's joint.  I will be able to share that term with my students this summer.  I will also make a note of the Neverending card example in Flexagons Inside Out.  The Neverending card is a way to grap young minds, along with several other simple flexagons, that perhaps one or two of them will look further into the whys and the math.  The Tetratetraflexagon by Robin Moseley and the Trihexaflexagon have been well received (with permission) by my students at the College for Kids program at the local Jr. College.

There is a similiar fold in Stick Note Origami by David Mitchell, page 89-92.  He calls it a Flexatron.  My nephew, when a Math student at the U of Illinois, was utterly fascinated by it.


----
## The Thrice Three-Fold Flexagon
February 11, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Thrice Threefold Flexagon – an alternate flex

Using the net described in SF12.23(3) produces a three-triangle triangle 60-60-60 with leaves 1A-1A(3)-1A(3). Ignoring the hidden labels and numbers, each pat has the label sequence A-D-F-C-E-B.
[My notation here means that in Serious Fun with Flexagons, figure 12.23 (or figure 3 in the online document http://lespook.files.wordpress.com/2009/04/thrice-three-fold-31.pdf), the angles start counterclockwise with the front right-hand corner and the visible leaves are listed starting with the pat down in front.]

The flex sequence described here achieves the same results as the “asymmetric four-fold pinch flex”. Except for the pyramid, all positions mentioned are flat. Since there are three pats at each of the six positions of the Tuckerman diagram, and each has two sides, there are 36 similar ways to do this flex.

Start with the middle right-hand flap F-C. Rotate it 360-degrees, interchanging the leaves 1A(3) and 1E(3). Then rotate the front flap 1A to the right. Pull out the flap 2B(4) on the right, and the flap 2D(4) on the left, making a five-triangle pentagon 90-120-120-120-90 with leaves 1E-2B(4)-1C(3)-1A(3)- 2D(4).

This pentagon opens to a four-sided pyramid like SF12.31c(11c), which collapses to SF12.31a(11a). Flexing the opened pentagon one place counterclockwise produces a 30-120-60-90-240 pentagon. Opening and flexing this pentagon one place produces a hexagon with angles 60-120-150-60-90-240. This hexagon has the same structure as SF12.31d(11d), and opens with the same flap structure as SF12.31b(11b). Opening and flexing this hexagon two more places returns to (the other side of) the first pentagon, which easily flexes back to the initial triangle.

I note that this four-sided pyramid, as well as the two three-sided pyramids P(1) and P(2), are easily inverted to display several leaves labeled 3 and 4.

Since Scott Sherman’s flex (message #397) easily gets to the trapezium SF12.34a(9a), I wonder if there are some other positions providing a challenge.


----
## Equivalent Flexagons
February 14, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Equivalent Flexagons

In the book “Serious Fun with Flexagons” appear these four flexagons:
1) net in SF9.14, type A;
2) net in SF9.17a, type BA;
3) net in SF9.17b, type BB;
4) net in SF12.20.
As assembled, these four flexagons are equivalent – except that one’s point of view changes the meaning of main position. My meaning of equivalent is that each main position of one can be flexed to some main position of the other.

Since the main position sequence diagram for one is the complete graph on sixteen vertices (each main position can be flexed to each other main position without passing through another main position), the same must be true for all four. The challenge is reduced to how relatively simple a flex sequence can be found between any given pair of main positions. The diagrams SF9.15, SF9.18, SF12.21 are incorrect because all connections are flex-able.

The SF9.14 flexagon is equivalent to the Square Duplex Edge Flexagon SF12.20  The main position 1,5(2,7) from SF9.14 flexes to the main position 1/2 from SF12.20 by pushing the two pairs of end pats labeled 1,5 towards each other making a mountain, then folding down the two pairs of pats labeled 5.

The SF9.14 flexagon is equivalent to SF9.17b, type BB. From the assembled main position 1(2) from SF9.17b, fold the flap 14,14 behind, then rotate the flap 8/12 in the middle. Rotate the flap 5/9 underneath the leaf 12, then open the flap 9,9 at the end. This is the main position 2,6(1,4) from SF9.14 (taking the labeling mod 8).

The SF91.4 flexagon is equivalent to SF9.17a, type BA. From the assembled main position 1(2) from SF9.17a, fold the flap 3,3 behind, then open the flap 8,8. Voila, the main position 1,5(8,3) from SF9.14 (taking the labeling mod 8).

### Les Pook

Ralph

Thanks very much for your comments on 'Serious Fun with Flexagons' in Messages Nos. 673 and 674. I should of course have included 'partial' in the captions to Figures 9.15, 9.18 and 12,21. I am sure that there is more waiting to be discovered, as has happened recently with hexaflexagons.

I am collecting the comments I have received, and later this year I plan to post a list of corrections and additions to 'Serious Fun with Flexagons'.


----
## posting from another group - sighting
February 14, 2010

### Kathy Knapp

This was posted on the origami list, and the fact that you can insert your own photos and then it prints out the  pattern is neat.  It uses glue , but is a great way to get people interested in flexagons.

Here's something fun to do, especially if you're a camera bug AND a folder!

http://foldplay.com/foldplay.action


----
## Partial diagram SF9.15
February 15, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Partial diagram SF9.15

The diagram SF9.15 (figure 9.15 in “Serious Fun with Flexagons”), “Main position sequence diagram for the fundamental irregular ring eight square even edge flexagon type A”, with net in SF9.14, is missing a number of flex connections. All 120 are possible.

The box-flex described on page 184 produces a square edge quadruple I’ll call [1,5], since the eight visible leaves have these two numbers. This intermediate position opens to eight of the sixteen main positions. There are three other such square edge quadruples – [2,6], [3,7], [4,8] – each of which also opens to eight of the sixteen main positions. Using these intermediate quadruples, each main position flexes to 11 other main positions.

A simpler method to obtain these quadruples is to push the two pairs of end pats together, making a mountain with the two middle pairs of pats, then rotate the vertical flaps 90-degrees from each other.

I have a pdf file picturing the detail for this set of main position box-flexes. I will try to upload it to the Flexagon Lovers Members area. I have kept the circumference main positions the same, but relabeled them structurally. Would it be better use a different order? There does seem to be a lack of flex-symmetry around this hexadecagon (alternate flexes are the same).

For this flexagon, this leaves (pun not intended) 3 flex types to find simple sequences for. They are 4-places, 9-places and 12-places around the circumference of the diagram – clockwise for main position 1,5(2,7), but counterclockwise for main position 5,1(4,7).

There is also a different box-flex possible with an interesting intermediate position. For example, from main position 1,5(2,7) to main position 6,2(5,8). Push the two pairs of end pats labeled 1,5 towards each other making a mountain with the other two pairs of pats labeled 1,5. Swivel to open this mountain to a box with interior labeled with 8. Close this box in the other direction. Separate and fold down the vertical pats.

This makes four different flexes between 1,5(2,7) and 6,2(5,8). (The inverse of this swivel box-flex also goes from 1,5(2,7) to 6,2(5,8).)


----
## 60-120 Rhombus flexagons
February 17, 2010

### Ralph Jones

60-120 Rhombus flexagons

Looking at SF10.50 (figure 10.50 in “Serious Fun with Flexagons”), I wondered why the obvious ring of three 60-120 rhombi was missing. So I came up with this. Would this be a flat regular odd edge ring of three rhombi flexagon?

The net is the first page in the attached file. Printed back-to-back, there are two copies of the same net. Otherwise, crease along the dotted line to align the two sides.

To assemble, tape the ends – no twists. As assembled, the flexagon is in an intermediate position – a tube/cylinder ring of three hexagons. Each main position is a flat hexagon made up of three rhombi on each side, with a single identifying letter in the center and the sequence 1,2,3 of three digits clockwise. There are eight main positions: AE, AF, BG, BH, CI, CJ, DK, and DL. Some flexes require bending the flexible leaves. Each pat has three leaves.

On the second page of the attached file, I have added some letters to the labeling of SF10.58 (which is essentially identical to IO/10.11) to help make the following comments. The third page is my extended version of SF10.50. The rhombus flexagon described above is pictured as SF10.50g’.

How does one determine whether it is possible to flex from SF10.58 to SF10.55?

How does one determine what a “main” position is for any given flexagon?

I realize that SF10.58 has “a” position with a 3-cycle, and SF10.55 has “a” two-position 4-cycle. But does SF10.58 not have a two-position 4-cycle? Does SF10.55 not have some position with a 3-cycle?
SF10.58 can be flexed to appear as SF10.50a.

Here are some (flat) positions/appearances for SF10.58 – SF10.50a, SF10.50b, SF10.50e’, SF10.50f’, SF10.50h’.

As assembled, the (labeled with added letters) SF10.58 appears as SF10.50b, labeled 1/2. Fold together each of the two pairs of leaves labeled 2X. Now the appearance is SF10.50e’, labeled A/B. There are 12 ways to get this form. This flex can be repeated to get to position 3/1 – this might be seen as 6-cycle involving two main positions.

The bottom (of this SF10.50e’) can be folded to appear as SF10.50a. After tucking in a leaf labeled 1B, the top side is labeled “*”. This one pat (the bottom two leaves) is the only difference from the main position for SF10.55 (which is identical to IO/10.5, the “Festive Flexagon”).
So close... Perhaps someone can find a way. Or is there a theory opposed?

When the assembled SF10.58 is folded in half (from SF10.50b), the appearance is SF10.50f’, and this can be twisted for another. The SF10.50e’ can easily be folded 2 ways to appear as SF10.50f’. There is at least a fifth (more complicated, nontrivial) way to achieve this same appearance.

Both the SF10.50a derived above from SF10.58, and the SF10.55 with the same appearance, have a six-sided box position that can be flattened to appear as SF10.50h’.

### Les Pook

Ralph

I've made up your rhombus flexagon. I agree that it could be called a 'flat regular odd edge ring of three rhombi flexagon'. I notice that there are two sorts of main position, one of which has loose flaps. I used three different flexes in flexing between main positions. There are also main positions in which face letters are mixed up. The flexagon doesn't fit into any of my classification schemes. If I'd thought of it I'd have put it into the Miscellaneous Flexagons chapter in SF.

It isn't possible to flex from SF10.58 to SF10.55 because the torsions are different: 4 and 6 respectively. If the net and torsion are the same it is usually possible to find a flex sequence to get from one flexagon to the other, depending on how much leaf bending is tolerated. I haven't proved this formally, but it is intuitively obvious and I haven't found any counter examples. I've included the torsion of all the flexagons described in SF, usually in the form 'there are x sectors and the torsion per sector is y'.

The determination of what is a 'main' position of a flexagon is an arbitrary choice. I don't think it's possible to write a rigorous definition. In writing descriptions I found it helpful to distinguidh between main and intermediate positions, and also between different types of main position.


----
## A Rhombus Dog-bone Position
February 19, 2010

### Ralph Jones

For this discussion, I am looking at the 12-leaf, 60-120 rhombus flexagon from SF10.60 (figure 10.60 from Les Pook’s “Serious Fund with Flexagons”).

As assembled, the appearance is SF10.50d – which I will refer to as SF10.61a – position 1/2. The attached file has my extended version of SF10.61, for the purpose of easy reference.

There are several ways to flex to SF10.61c. One is: pulling gently on the two leaves labeled “*”, produces SF10.61b. Continuing to stretch these two leaves, flatten and turn over to SF10.61c (this position 1/3 is similar to the original SF10.61). (Pulling gently on the two leaves labeled “+” returns to the original position.)

From SF10.61c, fold up the right corner to SF10.61d. Repeat this flex on the left corner to SF10.61e, position 3/3. This is my reference to a dog-bone position.

From SF10.61d, the top leaf on the right is attached to a flap underneath. Fold this flap up to position SF10.61f. Repeat this flex on the left to get a different SF10.61c, position 2/3. This is really undoing the dog-bone from the other side.

If one has kept track of the two leaves from SF10.61c labeled “+”, pulling gently on them in position SF10.61f produces position SF10.61g. (An inside leaf 3 needs to go on top.) A box-flex goes from SF 10.61g to SF10.61i, which is not a reflection nor a rotation of SF10.61g. There is a hinge down the middle for several straight appearances like SF10.61h.

Consider the 4-cycle flex c-e-c-a-c, or with more detail c(1/3)-e(3/3)-c(2/3)-a(1/2)-c(1/3). Is this cycle two “main” positions with two intermediates? Does this give an impression of 4-ness to this flexagon?

The 3-cycle mentioned in SF can go a-c-c-a, or with more detail a(1/2)-c(1/3)-c(2/3)-a(1/2). This originally gave me a 3-ness impression for this flexagon.

Here is a 6-cycle: a(1/2)-b(1,3/1,2)-c(1/3)-e(3/3)-c(2/3)-b(2,3/1,2)-a(1/2), or more simply a-b-c-e-c-b-a.

Here is an 8-cycle: a-b-c-d-e-d-c-b-a.

### Les Pook

This is a fascinating flexagon. I found some of the flexes and positions you describe, but didn't include them: SF is about twice as long as originally planned. I would probably have called the cycle c-e-c-a-c four main positions in a 4-cycle, but I wouldn't object to two main positions and two intermediate positions. It's a case of picking a terminology that can be used in descriptions.


----
## Torsion
February 19, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Thank you, Les, for your feedback.

I’m not sure I completely understand the computation of torsion per sector.

You said “Yes, flexagon variants folded from the same net can have different torsion. The flexagons shown in Figures 6.1 and 6.25 of 'Flexagons inside out' are an example, and there are many others.” [posting #534]

Doesn’t the concept of “net” include the assembly (twisting) instructions, implicit from the leaf labeling?

For the two examples SF10.55 and SF10.58, each can be assembled with appearance SF10.50a. How is the torsion per sector calculated? Is the torsion then the (algebraic?) sum of the torsions per sector?
When the sectors don’t form a ring (for example, the appearance in SF10.61), or have overlaps, does that matter? What if the pats don’t align vertically?

### Les Pook

The torsion of a sector can always be determined theoretically, but this is tricky. All the torsions given in SF were obtained by unfolding a sector and counting the number of half twists needed to flatten the sector. I originally derived Equation (4.1) (p. 45) empirically from the results of counts. It was only later that I worked out a theoretical justification. The total torsion of a flexagon is indeed the algebraic sum of the torsions of all the sectors. However, from the definition of a sector the torsion of each sector is the same. Overlaps don't matter. Once the ends of the net are joined the torsion can't be changed.

I use 'net' in two different senses. In one it does indeed include the assembly instructions. In the other it refers to a blank net that can be assembled in different ways, perhaps with different torsions. I think the context usually makes it clear which sense is meant. This second sense goes back to Martin Gardner's usage, and is used in posting 534. In writing SF I tried to keep a reasonable balance between readability and mathematical rigour.

### Ralph Jones

Hi Les,
More to my questions about torsion.

On SFp235, you say about SF10.55 that the torsion per sector is 2.
Would the torsion for appearance SF10.50a then be 0+2+0+2+0+2= 6 for the six pats?

Considering the same appearance SF10.50a for SF10.58, the torsion would seem to be 0+2+0+2+0+X= 4, since 5 of the pats are identical. I don't see how the torsion for that last pat/sector is X=0. Any comments to help correct my lack of understanding will be appreciated. Sorry if I am being too dense.

Just for purpose of reference, I showed how to get the appearance SF10.50a for SF10.58 in Message #678.

Thank you and have a great day!

### Les Pook

The answer to your first question is yes.

On the second point, I made up your flexagon and followed your directions, and found that the torsion of the pat with a connection to its centre leaf is zero, that is X = 0. To see this, disconnect the hinge at the centre leaf, turn the centre leaf over so that it becomes an end leaf, and reconnect the hinge. The pat is then strictly identical to the other two pats with 3 leaves, and its torsion is 2. Turning the leaf over introduces 2 more half twists.

I hope this is clear. I find that visualisation of the torsion of individual pats is difficult.

### Ralph Jones

Thanks, Les, for your feedback. I’m going to try to generalize your comment for my current understanding. Maybe it’s incorrect. I intend this message to be one big question.

A half-twist brings together two separated leaves connected by a hinge. There are two ways to do this. Let’s assign +1 for a right half-twist, and -1 for a left half-twist.

Consider one simple pat P of a flexagon. The strip used to construct the simple pat has two end leaves – call one of them the input leaf, the other the output leaf. By fixing the input leaf for reference, we essentially pick a direction (clockwise or counterclockwise) around the flexagon.

There are h=m-1 twisted hinges connecting the pile of m leaves of this one pat. If it takes R right half-twists to assemble P around the fixed input leaf, there are L=h-R left half-twists.
The signed number of half-twists, the torsion of the pat P, would be T(P)=R-L. This value is the same as (2*R+1-m), the same as (m-1-2*L). It is odd or even as m is even or odd. It could be positive or negative. In general, the sign depends on the choice of the input leaf and the sign attached to the right/left half-twists. A right twist and a left twist are considered to cancel each other.
When m=1, T=0.

Consider a pair of adjacent pats [P1,P2] of a flexagon. Adjacent means that the connecting hinge is flat – not twisted; it connects the output leaf of P1 to the input leaf of P2. The torsion of this pair of adjacent pats would be T[P1,P2]=T(P1)+T(P2). Similarly for a sequence of adjacent pats, even up to an entire flexagon.

The magnitude of the torsion of the entire flexagon will be the signed number of half-twists of the strip (the labeled net) used to assemble it. The sign of the torsion will depend on the whether one traverses clockwise or counterclockwise, and whether a right/left twist is assigned +/-1. The torsions of an enantiomorphic pair of flexagons would have the same magnitude and opposite signs.

Many times a thicker pat can be constructed from two adjacent pats by folding/twisting one onto the other. The torsion would be T(P1)+T(P2)+(+/-1). The twist doesn’t have to be onto, in that some of the leaves could interlace in the process.
When m=2, T=(+/-1).

One simple example will be sufficient to describe another way that two simpler pats may combine to make a thicker pat. Suppose that [P1,P2,P3] are three adjacent pats with the input hinge and the output hinge of P2 superimposed. The torsion of the pat formed by P1 and P3 would be T(P1)+T(P3), since no hinges were twisted in its construction.

### Les Pook

Ralph, your method only works in certain circumstances.

For example, consider the trihexaflexagon. In a main position the torsion per sector is clearly 1, and the total torsion is 3. In an intermediate position there are 3 pats of 3 leaves each. Your method gives a torsion per sector of 2, and a total torsion of 6, which is incorrect.

The explanation is that the torsion of a flexagon has two components. One is due to leaves folded together, as in your method. The other component is due to angular relationships between folded hinges, and is usually of opposite sign. I don't know a general method for calculating the second component. Flexing the trihexaflexagon between main and intermediate positions changes the values of the two components, but not their algebraic sum. The two components are reflected in the form of Equation (4.1) on p. 45 of 'Serious Fun with Flexagons'. For your method to work the sum of the second component round the flexagon must be zero. This explains the apparent discrepancy in posting 691: the second component isn't zero.

Also, consider the pentagon flexagons shown in Figures 4.23(a) and 4.26(a) in SF. These have different torsions because of the different angular relationships between hinges.


----
## Searching messages
February 24, 2010

### Ralph Jones

I am wondering why the search capability works so poorly.

If I search for "thrice", I get only #396,397 but not 670 nor 673, for example.

If I do an advanced search for "thrice" in the message body, I get only #397.

(I didn't use the quotes "" in the actual search.)

Thank you and have a great day!

### Kathy Knapp

Ralph, not on this site,  but last night on the British Origami Society's site, I too, had a problem.  I had in front of me a poorly printed out posting which I wanted to reprint.  I did not have the posting number, but I had the date, the sender , the subject and obviously words in the text.  I tried even an advanced search, change parameters, and finally gave up.  I wonder if searching group content is inherently a problem?

Just my two cents worth -


----
## 5-cycle compound square flexagon
February 24, 2010

### Ralph Jones

The flexagons described in IO-9.12 and SF6.10 are enantiomorphs (mirror images). {I refer to labeled nets in figures from “Flexagons Inside Out” and “Serious Fun with Flexagons” by Les Pook.} I’m not sure why the labeling was changed, but I will refer here to IO-9.12. As assembled, it is in position 1/2.

There are two 5-cycles, 1/2-2/3-3/4-4/5-5/1-1/2 and 1/2-4/5-2/3-5/1-3/4-1/2, as described in IO-9.13. When down written on paper, one appears as a pentagon 5-cycle and the other appears as a pentagram 5/2-cycle. Depending on choice, either cycle can be the outside pentagon while the other will be the pentagram. Can this be called either 4<4,4,5> or 4<4,4,5/2>? Or both 4<4,4,5,5/2>?

Each corner leaf on top is connected to an adjacent side leaf. The two flexes described here start by bringing together two such pairs on opposite corners. For some reason, the second 5-cycle, the result of the second flex, was omitted from SF.

The first cycle flex starts in position 1/2. Open each of two opposite corner pats labeled 1 and fold the top leaf onto its adjacent side leaf to make a 3-leaf pat. These two new pats will be corner pats of the next position. Start the flex. Notice that these two pats have a free corner towards the inside of the shape – these will be opposite corners of the next position. Hold these two free corners with the thumbs next to each other and gently separate, focusing on bringing the leaves labeled 3 to the top. This is position 2/3 of the first cycle.

The second cycle flex starts in position 1/2. Open each of two opposite side pats labeled 1 and fold the top leaf onto its adjacent corner leaf to make a 4-leaf pat. Start the flex. These two new pats come together at a corner (in a nice three-dimensional position) with label 2 on the top left and label 4 on the top right, and with label 4 on the bottom left and label 2 on the bottom right. Open these pats, separating each of these leaves labeled 2 from the 4-leaf pat to expose two pairs of leaves labeled 5. The remaining 3-leaf pats will be the corners of the next position. Hold the opened pats with the thumbs up, notice/find (expose) that there are two other pairs of leaves labeled 5 on each side, and gently separate, focusing on bringing the leaves labeled 5 to the top. This is position 4/5 of the second cycle.

### Les Pook

Ralph

I changed the labelling scheme in SF so that I used the standard face numbering scheme. This clarifies the relationship to first order fundamental pentagon even edge flexagons. The fact that it came out as the enantiomorph was fortuitous. In IO I mostly numbered nets by numbering faces of flexagons in sequence as they were flexed around a cycle. For SF I used standrad face numbering sequences where possible because this simplfies descriptions.

In SF I left out the second flex because I felt that it was too difficult. I left out some other compound flexagons for the same reason. Corresponding cycles can be traversed in first order fundamental pentagon even edge flexagons by using the band flex (collapse into an open ring and reassemble into the desired position).

It is probably best to stick to 4<4,4,,5>. since this is consistent with notation for other flexagons.


----
## six pentgon IR EE flexagons
February 28, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Hi Les,

In section SF9.4.1, you talk about fan folding an unlabeled net of pentagons onto a ring. The four particular nets you use are from SF3.4 and SF3.15. Is there some reason to restrict the possible nets to just these four?

What is fan folding? Do you mean simply that the polygons end up exactly aligned on top of the polygons of the ring? The index doesn't mention fan folding, so I'm not sure if you defined it somewhere.

The two examples SF9.22-6A,8A have a horizontal-axis rotational symmetry, and the pats seem to go alternately top down and bottom up. Is that part of your meaning of fan folding?

For the 6A example, I don't have any problems opening a pentagon edge-triple intermediate position from 1(2) to any of the positions, even 8(9) and 9(10). So should SF9.23 be completed?
Applying my recent torsion algorithm, I get T=0+2+1+3+1+ 2=9. Is part of your meaning for fan fold that all the half-twists are the same handedness?

For the example 8A, I get T=0+1+0+2+1+ 2+0+1=7, all the same handedness. But you say 5, in section SF9.4.3. What have I done wrong? It seems otherwise consistent that T=(number of leaves)-(number of pats) for these particular examples.

For IO-9.16 (same as SF6.5?), I get T=5*(0+1)=5, clear sectors.

I made a SF9.196B attempt. It seems kind of unstable.
T=0+3+2+3+0+ 1=9=15-6.

Thank you for your patience with my attempts to understand flexagons.

### Ralph Jones

I have noticed that, if I use a pat-torsion algorithm for several flexagons, I can use the unlabeled net to assemble them. The extremely simple algorithm arbitrarily takes +1 for a right half-twist and -1 for a left half-twist. The first leaf of the strip is fixed in place.
Plus, I seem to be able to start the assembly anywhere – at any leaf in any pat – when the twists are all the same handedness. In this case, the torsion is T=#leaves-#pats.

In addition to flexagon=net+(leaf labels), there is flexagon=net+(pat torsion sequence).

All these examples use the 15-leaf net from SF3.4A (SF9.22 ignoring the labels).

Example SF9.22-6A, T=0+2+1+3+1+2=9 (appearance SF9.19A).

Example SF9.22-8A, T=0+2+1+2+0+1+0+1=7 (appearance SF9.21A).

Second Example SF9.22-8A, T=0+2+1+3+1+(-1+1)=7 also works (i.e. flexes to the same assembly), even though the appearance is the 6IREE in SF9.19A. I’ll call this type 6AB.
But changing that last pat to (+1-1) seems different, I’ll call it type 6AC. Both of these seem to flex just like type 6A –  even though the torsion is only 7. So the type 8A flexes all around a 15-cycle of 6-pat positions, in addition to a 15-cycle of 8-pat positions.

Three examples SF6.5, T=5*(0+1)=5 (5 sectors). The enantiomorph is IO-9.16. Here are two more assemblies that also work.
SF6.5, T=0+1+0+1+0+2+1+(-1+1)=5 (appearance SF9.21A).
SF6.5, T=0+2+1+(-1+2)+1+(-1+1)=5 (appearance SF9.19A).
Here is type 10A, flexing around a 3-cycle of 10-pat positions, a 15-cycle of 8-pat positions (type 8AB), and a 15-cycle of 6-pat positions (type 6AD) – even though the torsion is only 5.

This is getting to be way more complex than my original simple idea. I don’t yet know what happens if I switch the (-1+2) to (+1-1+1) or to (+2-1). Some way to organize all the variations is needed.

Questions: What torsion sequences would necessarily result in an appearance like SF2.17 (SF9.19 without the pat depths)? What torsion sequences would necessarily result in SF9.19-6A? 6B? SF9.20? SF9.21-8A? etc.

### Les Pook

Ralph, answering your questions in order.

No particular reason to restrict the nets used, except that these do lead to some interesting flexagons.

i haven't defined fan folding explicitly. I do mean that the polygons are exactly aligned with the polygons in the ring, and twists are always in the same direction. This means that pats do go alternately up and down. Also, the number of polygons in the net fan folded onto a polygon in the ring must be less than the number of edges on the polygons, otherwise loose flaps are produced.

SF9.23 could be completed. I restricted it to what could be done by using the flexes I described.

IO-9.16 is the same as SF6.5.


----
## Hinge Assembly
March 7, 2010

### Ralph Jones

The attached file is an Excel spreadsheet that calculates pat-hinge angles and pat-torsion. The input is a list of leaf-hinge angles and hinge half-twists. I hope it is obvious how to add new information – if you are already familiar with Excel. I want to emphasize that this much information is limited, and does not always completely specify flexagon assembly. I welcome any feedback for improvement.

Each assembled pat has an input hinge (twist 0) and an output hinge (twist 0). The pat-hinge angle is the angle, positive or negative, between these two hinges. Each pat is assembled by twisting the hinges (see method 2 or 3 below) between the input and output hinges. The sum of the +/-1’s is the pat-torsion (+1 for a right half-twist). Sector torsion is similar.

I am interested to pursue the alternative idea of flexagon assembly by twisting hinges, as opposed to using labels. The underlying net of leaves connected sequentially by hinges is the same. Recently, I have been having some serious fun with pentagon flexagons, so I picked some of those as examples in the spreadsheet. I put a couple of others in. I have selected this slightly more complicated example (#10 in the spreadsheet) to discuss.

Thrice Threefold Flexagon Assembly Method 1.
This assembly (15 twists) is specified in SF12.23. It uses labels on the faces of the leaves. It is a little bit complex. However, this method applied individually and separately to each of the identical pats is a little bit easier, and is equivalent to method 2. At each step, in any of these methods, all previous twists remain unchanged.

It is important to keep the input leaf fixed, do not turn it over; for each pat it has the label 1A. For each pat, orient the strip so that the input leaf is on the left. Before and after each step, the net is flat. If there is any lack of clarity, I welcome feedback for improvement..

Thrice Threefold Flexagon Assembly Method 2.
L3,R2,R1,R4,L5,0) Some terminology/notation is required to communicate tersely. The R1 in third position means step 1 starts at hinge 3 with a right half-twist. The R2 means step 2 twists hinge 2 to the right. The L3 means step 3 twists hinge 1 to the left. The “0” means this pat is complete, proceed to assemble the next pat, and reorient so that the input leaf is on the left and the remaining strip is on the right.
The pat-torsion, step-by-step, is +1+1-1+1-1=1.

Thrice Threefold Flexagon Assembly Method 3.
R1,L2,R3I1,L4,R5,0) This is a sequential twist assembly, so the numbers 1,2,3,4,5 are redundant – but the I1 is important. Making a right half-twist at hinge 3 in step 3, R3I1, could place leaf 4 above the pile, or it could be inserted in the pile – “I1” – down one place. Either choice would not affect the torsion nor the pat-hinge angle. This particular flexagon puts it down one place.
The pat-torsion, step-by-step, is +1-1+1-1+1=1.

Either method 1 or 2 can be applied separately to the assembly of each of the three pats of this flexagon. The total torsion, by pats, is T=+1+1+1=3.

### Ralph Jones

This method, another hinge twist assembly, does not distinguish twists as right or left. Note that each hinge k connects the two leaves k-1 and k+1. As before, twisting hinge k places leaf k+1 above or below leaf k-1, but not necessarily adjacent to it in the pile of leaves that constitutes a pat of the flexagon. The input leaf of a pat is not turned over during assembly.

Thrice Threefold Flexagon Assembly Method 4.
2,3,3,5,6,0) The sequential assembly terminology here is: twist hinge 1 so as to place leaf 2 into place number 2 in the pile (i.e., underneath leaf 1). Next twist hinge 2 so as to place leaf 3 into place number 3 in the pile (i.e., at the bottom). Then twist hinge 3 to place leaf 4 into place number 3 (between leaves 2 and 3) in the pile. Finally, twist hinges 4 and 5 to place leaves 5 and 6 at the bottom of the pile. The “0” means don’t twist hinge 6, so this pat is complete and leaf 7 will start the next pat.
The result is that the first pat has the pile of leaves [1,2,4,3,5,6]. This sequence might be an alternate description of the pat construction. Another description might be (d,d,u1,d2,d).
Applying this same assembly sequence to the second pat would result in the pile of leaves [7,8,10,9,11,12].

Either method 2 or 3 or 4 can be applied separately to the assembly of each of the three identical pats of this flexagon.

### Ralph Jones

I unintentionally misspoke before. I should have said this.
Each hinge k connects the two leaves k and k+1. Twisting hinge k places leaf k+1 above or below leaf k, but not necessarily adjacent to it in the pile of leaves that constitutes a pat of the flexagon. The input leaf of a pat is not turned over during hinge assembly.

The torsion of a flexagon is the number of half-twists in the net required to assemble it. When all leaves are in the same plane – flat – each hinge torsion is simply (-1/0/+1), and these can be summed to compute the torsion. Otherwise, this method can’t be used.

If some of the following half-twists are incorrect, please help me see how to correct them.

Usual Trihexaflexagon Assembly
To be specific, start with the net SF4.14. This is the same as IO-1.1.

Main Position) T=0+1+0+0+1+0+0+1+0=3 specifies the order of the right/left half-twists.

Intermediate Position 1) T=-1+1+0+0+1+1+0+1+0=3 (twist 1,6)
Fold the MP in half along hinges 1 and 6, to a three triangle flat configuration.

Intermediate Position 2) T=-1+1+0+1+1-1+1+1+0=3
Reverse hinge 6, twisting hinges 4 and 7, to a 2-pat configuration. Pat torsion T=0+3. There are two other similar IP’s with pat torsion T=2+1.

I was very suspicious at first because the circular appearance is that all the pats are identical. But the torsion is odd (Moebius band), and is determined by a twisted linear strip, not a circular one. Or I could be totally wrong?

Unusual Trihexaflexagon Assembly
Intermediate Position 3) T=-1+1+1+1+1-1+1+1-1=3 (twist 3,9)
Twist hinges 3 and 9, to make a single 9-leaf pat in the order 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9.

Intermediate Position 4) Assuming for the moment that these half-twists are accurate, opening either IP2,3 at hinges 3,6,9 produces a triangle edge triple with pat torsions 0,2,2. The formula on page SFp45 might tell me that the remaining
-1=-(3-2*1) torsion is somehow contained in the three 120 degree (average) dihedral angles between the pats? (The +/- sign is determined by initial conditions.)


----
## Heptahexaflexagon question
March 12, 2010

### Ralph Jones

The attached file lists five (5) Tuckerman diagrams for heptahexaflexagons.

Robin Moseley says this about his variations 2&3 (B&C).
"This is the hexaflexagon with the smallest number of faces that will fold up into two flexagons with different Tuckerman state diagrams."
But these two diagrams are actually identical, with the corresponding faces mentioned in the table.
He also says "Both variations are folded from the same template." That template looks very much like IO-4.16 which does produce the diagram IO-4.17.

Is something wrong here? All the claims I have seen are that there are only four (4) different heptaflexagons. E.g., page IOp37.

### Robin Moseley

There are several discussion items concerning how different hexaflexagon state diagrams will produce the same frieze patterns from this group in 2007.  My Tuckerman diagrams may be a little confusing and not the best way to represent a flexagon as has been pointed out before in this forum.  I posted much better state diagrams for some of the basic flexagons. The ones for the hepaflexagons can be found here:

http://www.flexagon.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=30&Itemid=35

It is correct there can only be 4 variations of the Heptaflexagon and the state diagrams above prove this is true.

### Ralph Jones

Thank you, Robin, for the reference to your "Hexaflexagon Maps - 7 sides". It refers to Var. 1,2,3,4 where you have elsewhere referred to variations 1,4,B/2,C/3 respectively.

There still is the problem that the Tuckerman diagrams - in the file with variations you call B&C - are identical. So neither of them has the diagram Var. 4.
I can guess that your intent was probably to label the weekdays in variation C according to the diagram Var. 4, since one could flex sequentially through the week in that diagram, maintaining Sunday on one of the faces.

I have really enjoyed your artistic depictions on the faces of various flexagons. When/if you correct the labeling for the weekdays, could you please let me know.

I'm curious - with that relabeling - could one still V-flex between the variations? Is that a result of the common frieze? Would it also be true for the 4/733 in your 12-face variations file, with a common frieze, that there would be some flex between them?

How does one know something like "All straight strip flexagons with more than 9 sides have multiple maps."?

### Robin Moseley

The question on straight strip flexagons is a good question.  This was discussed in the following paper:

M. Kosters, A theory of hexaflexagons, Nieuw Archief Wisk., 17 (1999)

From this paper, the sequence of the number of maps for straight strip flexagons with numbers of triangles:  9, 18, 27, 36, 45, ...   would be:

1, 1, 1, 4, 14, 74, 434, 2876, 19848, 143306, 1062149, 8058223, 62259820, 488630360, 3886211100, 31267852668

That is an interesting sequence!  Note that for the 36 tirangle straight strip, I show five state diagrams on flexagon.net (http://www.flexagon.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23&Itemid=37) and two of the five are mirror images of each other so the sequence above only shows 4 maps for the 36 triangle straight strip.  It is quite interesting to take the 36 triangle straight strip and fold it into the 4 maps. One will find many patterns and in particular the patterns of the frieze patterns of the flexagons with smaller numbers of triangles.  My 12 faced Zodiac frieze pattern makes it easy to see and create all these intermediate folding patterns.  Folding up the variations of the 12 faced hexaflexagon is just as fun as flexing it!  Try it.

I think the answer to the possible V-flex variations between multiple foldings of a single freize can be found in Bruce & Emily McLean's papers or on his website.  when I get a chance, I'll have to fix the diagrams for that 7 sided map as it is incorrect.

### Brandon

This is very closely related to a question I was having about mirror images. This would appear to suggest that mirror image state diagrams actually are the same?


----
## McLean and Kosters
March 21, 2010

### Les Pook

Attached are scans of the McLean and Kosters articles, with apologies for the poor quality.


----
## Various questions
March 20, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Thank you, Robin, for the reference “M. Kosters, A theory of hexaflexagons, Nieuw Archief Wisk., 17 (1999)”. Do you have a copy of this you might be able to share? Is there an English translation?
Is there an English translation of the Vasilyev article on tetra-flexagons?

The Conrad-Hartline article starting at
http://delta.cs.cinvestav.mx/~mcintosh/comun/flexagon/flexagon.html
does not have the appendices. It seems to be an unedited version. Is there a published version or one with the appendices?

Does someone have a copy of the McLean paper? I was able to construct the 36-leaf dodecahexaflexagon from the available figures. But do I need to spend $31.50 to get a copy?

Are there sources that would have the kind of information that there are multiple maps for various strips? I am interested in other, non-straight, strips that are known to have multiple maps. I would like to try putting together some illustration. Robin’s
http://www.flexagon.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23&Itemid=37
answers that particular question admirably for 4 maps from a 36 triangle straight strip.
I finally finished folding Robin’s Zodiac example into the 4 maps. I found that the (symbols bottom corner) was actually Variation V, not Variation II. At least the way I assembled it. The consistent faces is the only check I could make.

There are so many ways to flex hexaflexagons – pinch, V-flex, tuck-flex, slot-flex, pyramid-shuffle, etc. Is there some kind of notation to keep track of the pat/leaf location easily? Is there some way to analytically determine whether a given pat/leaf/sector structure can be flexed by some particular set of flexes from another such structure? And how?

If I knew enough to ask more questions about sources of information, I would.

### Bruce McLean

Ralph,

Just send me an email and I am allowed to send you my personal copy of our
paper, the combinatorics of all regular flexagons. The paper that Les sent
you is not the one you were referring to.


----
## Martin Gardner
May 28, 2010

### Ann Schwartz

As most of you know, Martin Gardner died on May 22. Without his writing about flexagons, it's almost certain that we would not be exploring these fascinating objects today. And what an influence he has been in so many fields, not just mathematics!

Here are links to just some of his obituaries and memorial articles:

http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/24/us/24gardner.html

http://ncse.com/news/2010/05/martin-gardner-dies-005534

http://www.city-journal.org/2010/eon0527sk.html

http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/obituaries/culture-obituaries/books-obituaries/7765184/Martin-Gardner.html

http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2010/may/25/martin-gardner

http://articles.latimes.com/2010/may/26/local/la-me-martin-gardner-20100526

http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1992443,00.html

http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=profile-of-martin-gardner

http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=127095954

http://voices.washingtonpost.com/postmortem/2010/05/martin-gardner.html

### Vivek Gharpure

a sad day. may his soul rest in peace. he has given me immense joy for as long as i can remember.


----
## McLean papers –v1
June 8, 2010

### Ralph Jones

I have been reading the two papers VF [V-flexing the Hexahexaflexagon] and RF [The Combinatorics of All Regular Flexagons] by Bruce McLean [et.al.]. For purposes of discussing these, I hope everyone can get a copy.

Some errata. VFp.463: “60” degrees should be “120” degrees.

VFp.461: It is important to emphasize the restriction “acceptable” in rule (a). The use of the word “pat” in both papers for multiple purposes is at first confusing. In section 6, at the bottom of page 460, the adjective “acceptable” is used/defined so as to restrict the paper strip to regular (straight). This definition should include the further restriction `“p<q”` to conform with the statement in section 4 about not turning the paper strip over. This is also true, and needs to be emphasized, for RF-Definition 2. Maybe I just have a blind spot, assuming that “adjacent” is reflexive.

VFp.463: The statement in section 8 about three pinch flexes is incorrect. The word “will” is too strong. For the regular hexahexaflexagon, it is apparently true that three P-flexes can be found that return to a given class.
The statement “There are another 92 faces that you can find by pinch flexing twice from the above faces” on the web-site is worded differently.

It should be noted that the formulas in VF and RF defining the pinch- and V-flexes are valid only when torsion = - (9n-6), left half-twists only.

Searching the user group for “errata”, I found only the one for IO [Flexagons Inside Out]. Are there more? Is the number 3940 on IOp.49 accurate, or should it be the 3,420 from VF?

For future investigation, that word “acceptable” could be replaced by something like “type-a” for the restriction to a straight strip. Does anyone know how to characterize the pats made from the other two types of paper strips that can be used to make hexahexaflexagons?

In VF, by exhaustively going through each of the 192 classes, use is made of the unstated observation
“All regular hexahexaflexagon (type-a) classes satisfying rule (b’) can be achieved by V-flexing or P-flexing”.
I am not aware of such a theorem (is there one?) for higher order hexaflexagons, but it is used in RF as an unstated, undiscussed axiom/rule.

I am in the process of implementing various hexaflexagon flexes using my new toy – “Mathematica”. Something very interesting happened.
I wrote a function to implement the fifteen V-flex-steps traversing the VCardioid mentioned in VF. Consider the five hexaflexagons F6a, F6b, F6c, F9a, F12a – 6a,9a,12a being the straight strip versions, and 6b,6c being two other variations. As claimed in VF, the result of VCardioid[F6a] was the identity. It was trivial for me to try VCardioid[F9a] and VCardioid[F12a] – each also gave the identity. Not the identity for F6b,F6c.
Is there any way to see this as a general algebraic identity for straight strip hexaflexagons? Something like (VR)15=I?

### Bruce McLean

Ralph states

    In VF, by exhaustively going through each of the 192 classes, use is made of
    the unstated observation "All regular hexahexaflexagon (type-a) classes
    satisfying rule (b') can be achieved by V-flexing or P-flexing".
    I am not aware of such a theorem (is there one?) for higher order
    hexaflexagons, but it is used in RF as an unstated, undiscussed axiom/rule.

You are correct. We showed how to visit all 3420 faces in VF and we did not
mention how to do it in RF for the nona, the dodeca, or higher because we
don't know how to do it.

### Bruce McLean

Welcome,
Today, I will only try to talk about one point. Initial faces were used for
the
first time in 2010, so back in 1979 I just said equivalent faces. If there
is no symmetry, then there are 18 mathematical faces for each initial
(equivalent) face.

I suggest we look at the java applet located at

http://math.georgiasouthern.edu/~bmclean/flex/index.html

Ralph states

    VFp.463: The statement in section 8 about three pinch flexes is incorrect.
    The word "will" is too strong.

If all you meant was "You can find 3 Pinches that don't return", then I
agree and everyone can skip the rest of this email.
When I pinch and I rotate according to the traverse in table 3 of the VF
paper, it 'will' happen.

Since most of these faces have 3 singletons I didn't think I had to say that
a rotation between each pinch flex was needed. The applet starts at initial
face 1. R is rotate clockwise, P is pinch and V is a v-flex.

Starting from the applet,
Initial Face 1 - R P R P R P returns you to initial face 1 and we have just
seen initial faces 101 and 102 each with 3 singletons.
R V takes us to initial face 2
Initial face 2 - P R P R P returns you to initial face 2 and we have just
seen initial faces
16 and 103. Yes, 16 is one of the first 100 and only has 1 singleton and can
be located in Fig. 10.
R V takes us to initial face 3
Initial face 3 - P R P R P returns you to initial face 3 and we have just
seen initial faces
104 and 105
etc.

The section of the VFlex paper referred to is in an attachment to this
e-mail.

Ralph states

    For the regular hexahexaflexagon, it is apparently true that three P-flexes
    can be found that return to a given class.
    The statement "There are another 92 faces that you can find by pinch flexing
    twice from the above
    faces" on the web-site is worded differently.

Check out table 3 and it shows the 3 pinch flexes that 'will' return you to
each initial face.

Thanks for your interest and I will try again next week to speak to other
issues.


----
## McLean papers –v2
July 1, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Hexaflexagon Classes

I have been reading the two papers VF [V-flexing the Hexahexaflexagon] and RF [The Combinatorics of All Regular Flexagons] by Bruce McLean [et. al.]. For purposes of discussing these, I hope everyone can have a copy.

I appreciate the clarity of exposition in VF. I have been able to implement the flexes exactly as described. F6a is my shorthand for the hexahexaflexagon in this paper. In both papers, turning the flexagon over is not allowed. Also in both papers, two flexagons are considered equivalent, or duplicates, if they differ only by adding a constant to the numbers labeling each leaf: the same hexaflexagon translation class. I use this concept here.

The “V-Cardioid” identity in this paper I refer to as I=(VR1)*15, meaning that a V-flex, followed by a rotation one place clockwise, and this repeated fifteen times, returns to the same exact pat structure. At each place along this sequence [pictured as a cardioid in Figure 10 of the paper VF], the identity I=(VR5)*6 holds [R5 means rotate one place counterclockwise]. Some of these latter sequences intersect the cardioid, and the two sequences starting at positions 7 and 10 actually satisfy I=(VR5)*3.

All of these sixteen sequences together produce 15+6*15=195 flexes. For F6a, there are 95 duplicate classes and one hundred distinct classes, meaning the same pat structure but perhaps translated by adding a constant to the numbers labeling each leaf. Consistent with the paper VF, I have found that there are no other classes accessible by only V-flexes.

    F6a) 100 = V is a shorthand way to express all this [using only V-flexes].

I have a few more results to describe. So far, I have programmed the four flexes: P=Pinch-flex; V=V-flex; T=Tuck-flex; and S=PyramidShuffle-flex. I have found a definite statement that extends the result 192=PV of the VF paper.
F6a) 192 = PV = PT = PS = PVT = PVS = PTS = PVTS
For example, all classes are accessible by only P- and T-flexes.

Some other results, completing the 2^4-1=15 possibilities, are

    F6a) 3 = P, 161 = VT = VTS, 113 = VS, 4 = T = TS, 1 = S

No S-flexes are possible for F6a [without some other flexing]. Although there are 3n-6=12 flexagons in the Tuckerman sequence, these represent only 3 classes.

I do not hesitate to mention that there is always a possibility there is some flaw [bug] in the software I have written.

The two identities [ I=(VR1)*15 and I=(VR5)*6 ] mentioned above I found to hold for these other hexaflexagons [the “a” part of my reference is to a “straight strip” of length 9n (for n=2,3,4,5) providing 3n faces]:
F9a [from McLean’s web-site]; F12a [from the paper RF]; F15a [that I assembled]. For the specific 195 V-flexes mentioned above, there are respectively 150, 100, 150 distinct classes. The intersections with the cardioid do not always happen, and the shortened sequences at positions 7 and 10 do not happen.
More generally, after over 5 hours of computer time, I stopped with V>13,000 for F9a.
I have found these counts of hexaflexagon classes.

    F9a1) 15 = P, 4 = T = TS,
    F9a3) 15 = P, 11 = T = TS [two different starting points along the Tuckerman sequence]
    F12a1) 7 = P, 72 = T, 4 = S, 152 = TS
    F12a2) 7 = P, 4 = T = S
    F12a3) 7 = P, 115 = T, 4 = S, 451 = TS
    F15a2) 9 = P, 4 = T = TS
    F15a3) 9 = P, 45 = T, 350 = TS

I do not know if there is any structural meaning of the 4=T=TS for four of these.

### Ralph Jones

Clearly, I made a mistake with my arithmetic. I should have said, 15+2*6*15=195, since there are actually two identity sequences I=(VR5)*6 at each place along the cardioid sequence.


----
## McLean papers –v3
July 22, 2010

### Ralph Jones

In order to present a table of information, I have attached my message this time. I could not figure how to put it into the text of an e-mail.


----
## McLean papers –v4
July 22, 2010

### Ralph Jones

Figure 10 of VR depicts a “cardioid” of 15 flexagons made with V-flexes satisfying the identity `I=(R1V)*15` for the hexaflexagon I refer to as F6a. [Please note that I will try not to repetitively mention all the rotations, for simplicity sake.] At each point, there are two sets of “hexagons”, each satisfying the identity `I=(VR5)*6`. This collection of 15+2*5*15=165 flexagons has a property important for this discussion: for each pair, there is a sequence of V-flexes [including, of course, appropriate rotations] transforming one to the other.

I have found that this structural property holds for each of the straight-strip hexaflexagons I have tried: F6a, F9a, F12a, F15a, and F18a. I refer to this as the generalized Figure 10.

[I am ignoring, as irrelevant to this particular discussion, the fact that, depending on the assembly from the straight-strip, some of these “hexagons” intersect and there are duplicates in the generalized Figure 10.]

Some examples: I start numbering with #1. To get from #1 to #9, use the sequence `Sa=(R1V)*8`. To get from #9 to #9B2, use the sequence `Sb=R4(VR5)*2`. To get from #9B2 to #1A5, use the sequence `Sc=(VR5)*4R2(R1V)*7` to get back to #1, and then `Sd=R2(VR5)*5`. Use the sequence `Se=(VR5)*1R4` to return from #1A5 to #1. It is relatively easy to check that `I=Sa+Sb+Sc` and `I=Sd+Se`, if I haven’t made a typing error.

For F9a, McLean found this alternative sequence `Sm=R2VR5VR2VR1VR1VR1VR1VR4VR5VR2VR2VR4V` to get from #1 to #10t. The result was #10 translated, with all the leaves incremented by 13. The importance of this is that 13 is relatively prime to 27=(number of leaves in the straight-strip)=9n. Thus, the sequence Sm+(V1R)*6 will translate #1 by 13, with all the leaves incremented by 13, and some number of repetitions will increment all the leaves of #1 by +1 (or any other amount). He concluded that all the translates of each member of the generalized Figure 10 (for F9a) are accessible by only V-flexes [and appropriate rotations]. This justifies applying the counting results of the RF paper to the case 9n=27, which is the straight-strip 3n-hexaflexagon for 3n=9.

Also for F9a, I found a sequence `Si=R3VR1VR1VR1VR3VR2VR2V` transforming #9B2 to #1A5t, translated by 23 (which is relatively prime to 27). Any such sequence, between any two members of the generalized Figure 10, can be used to obtain the same justification. Here, the sequence `Sj=Sa+Sb+Si+Se` will increment all the leaves of #1 by 23. [Incrementing the leaves is modulo 9n.]

All this brute force achieves limited results –  the numbers are so extraordinarily large. Does anyone have any other theories or possible points-of-view? The well documented Figure 10 of VF is a good start. What might be a reasonable procedure to look for a relatively prime translation for the 9n=36 straight-strip 3n-hexaflexagon, or dodecahexaflexagon?

Have a great day. Ralph Jones

F6a) {2,3,-,5,4,7,6,-,8,9,-,11,10,13,12,-,14,15,-,17,16,1,18}

F9a1) {1,4,5,2,3,-,7,6,9,8,-,10,13,14,11,12,-,16,15,18,17,-,19,22,23,20,21,-,25,24,27,26}

F12a1) {4,3,6,5,-,9,10,7,8,13,14,11,12,-,16,15,18,17,-,21,22,19,20,25,26,23,24,-,28,27,30,29,-,33,34,31,32,1,2,35,36}


----
## Book Announcement
September 11, 2010

### Ann Schwartz

A new book by Flexagon Lovers member Jean Pedersen, A MATHEMATICAL TAPESTRY (cowritten with Peter Hilton), is now available in hardcover and paperback (Amazon link http://www.amazon.com/Mathematical-Tapestry-Demonstrating-Beautiful-Mathematics/dp/0521128218/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1284264670&sr=1-1)

Jean says about the book, "There is a great deal about the theory of flexagons and their relationship with group theory, so anyone interested in those aspects would find it interesting. In particular Chapter 14 has, what I think is a very amusing, discussion of the group theory connected with the 3-faced flexagon."

From the late, great Martin Gardner,"'For some 30 years Peter Hilton and Jean Pedersen have written papers and books on mathematics, both recreational and advanced. Now they have pulled it all together in one exciting and handsome volume. It opens with detailed instructions on how to fold paper flexagons (there are now dozens of websites on these bewildering paper toys), followed by paper models of polygons and curious polyhedra, then on to other fascinating topics. The emphasis throughout is on symmetry and elegance. The writing is clear and informal, and the authors do not hesitate to include lovely proofs in number theory, algebra, geometry, and group theory. The book is a rich 'tapestry, as the authors call it, from first page to last."

I will be more than happy to announce news of other books, articles, or papers about or relating to flexagons from our members.

### Kathy Knapp

Looks amazing! For once there is really a lot of information/pages in the "look inside" feature. I will be purchasing this. Now, where is a Borders 40% off coupon when I need it?

### Les Pook

Thanks for the information. The book looks interesting, so I've ordered a copy. When I've had a look at it I'll announce it on my website.

Providing information on flexagon publications is a useful function of the Group.


----
## A mathematical tapestry
October 2, 2010

### Les Pook

I've added a note on 'A mathematical tapestry' by Hilton and Pedersen to the Flexagons page of my website http://lespook.wordpress.com/flexagons/


----
## polygon lamp shade- not really modular origami, but interesting
October 5, 2010

### Kathy Knapp

http://www.instructables.com/id/Universal-lamp-shade-polygon-building-kit/
I really like the finished globe, and do want to try making one from milk jugs - good thing they have not all gone into recycling yet!


----
## Peter Hilton--obituary
November 12, 2010

### Ann Schwartz

The coauthor of several books that included information on flexagons--including BUILD YOUR OWN POLYHEDRA and A MATHEMATICAL TAPESTRY recently passed away. One of his accomplishments is the fact that he worked at Bletchley Park to crack the German codes--at the age of 18. Here is the obituary sent to me by Jean Pedersen, his coauthor and collaborator.

PETER J. HILTON
of Binghamton

Peter Hilton, 87, Distinguished Professor of Mathematics at Binghamton
University, died on Saturday, November 6, 2010. He is survived by his wife Margaret, sons and daughter-in-law, Nicholas Hilton, Binghamton and Timothy and Catherine Hilton, Seattle, Wa., two grandsons, one great granddaughter and brother and sister-in-law, Dr. Sydney and Mary Hilton, North Wales, U.K.

Peter was born in London, and educated at Oxford University. During World War II, at age 18, he was recruited from Oxford, because of his mathematical ability and knowledge of German, to work at Bletchley Park, the secret British facility dedicated to breaking German codes. This project was led by Alan Turing, the celebrated mathematician and founder of computer science, with whom the young Peter Hilton worked closely. Initially, Peter worked on breaking the Enigma code, and, later, on the more refined Fish code. Once the British Official Secrets Act was lifted in the 1980's, his
lectures about the years at Bletchley Park were highly popular at venues all over the world. He gave several such lectures at Binghamton University.

After the War Peter obtained his doctorate from Oxford. Peter went on to hold academic positions at Cambridge and Manchester Universities, and a Chair at the University of Birmingham. In 1962, he moved to the United States where he was Professor of Mathematics, first at Cornell, then at the University of Washington and the Battelle Institute. He held the Louis D. Beaumont Chair at Case Western Reserve University for a number of years,ending in 1982 when he became Distinguished Professor at Binghamton University, retiring in 1995.

Peter Hilton was one of the most influential mathematicians of his
generation. He made major contributions to algebraic topology and
homological algebra. His influence on these subjects has been profound. In his later years he was also a significant figure in Mathematics Education, especially in Continental Europe. He published hundreds of research articles and many books on mathematics and mathematics education, and he lectured at conferences into his mid-eighties.

### Anthromom

Interesting obit.


----
## flexagon Calendar for 2011
November 26, 2010

### Kathy Knapp

http://www.origami-cdo.it/modelli/calendariorigami.htm

This is a cross post from the Origami list. Too bad my color printer need ink! It is a colorful calendar that is shown on the video.


----
## A mathematical tapestry
November 27, 2010

### Les Pook

Peter Hilton and Jean Pederson. Illustrated by Sylvie Donmoyer. A mathematical tapestry. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, 2010.

The authors have collected together diverse mathematical material, mostly at a recreational mathematics level, that they have previously published over the past 30 years or so. Where appropriate, the material has been updated, often by the addition of more recent references. There is an extensive list of references, both to justify some of the statements, and for readers who wish to pursue some of the ideas in more detail. A welcome feature of the book is the professionally prepared illustrations, which complement the text nicely. There is a good index, but the provision of some cross references in the text would have been helpful.

Despite the diversity of the material there are some unifying themes, and the authors provide a list of these in the preface, together with lists of the chapters in which they appear. At first sight the chapters appear to be in a random order, but they do follow a logical sequence. Some of the chapters include detailed instructions for the construction, by folding strips and sheets of paper, of some interesting mathematical models. The instructions are reasonably easier to follow, but careful attention to detail is needed. The authors suggest the use of gummed parcel tape for some of the models. This might not be available to some readers, but it is easy to adapt the instructions to other methods of construction.

The first chapter is on flexagons, and opens with the story of how they were discovered by Arthur H Stone in 1939. The authors do not attempt to define a flexagon, (An informal definition is: flexagons are hinged polygons that have the intriguing property of displaying different pairs of faces when they are flexed.) Instead, they describe in detail how to construct flexagons from straight strips of paper, and then manipulate them. Flexagons can only be fully appreciated by making and manipulating models. The first flexagon described is the well known trihexaflexagon, which is made from equilateral triangles, and has a hexagonal outline. It has three faces. Sketches show in detail how to flex it to display three different pairs of faces. More complicated hexaflexagon are then described, and some of the underlying mathematics is introduced. Next, octaflexagons are described. These are made from 45°-45°-90° triangles, and have a square outline. They are sometimes known by other names. Flexing is more difficult than for hexaflexagons because they are shape changing flexagons, in which the faces are not always flat. This chapter is a good introduction to flexagons for anyone who does not know what a flexagon is. Chapter 13 is a detailed description of symmetries of a trihexaflexagon. These are illustrated by amusing decorations of individual triangles. It is shown that possible arrangements and orientations of the faces form a group, which is the dihedral group D18: the group of symmetries of the regular 18-gon. Groups are defined and explained in Chapter 16.

Various aspects of regular polygons are discussed in Chapters 2, 3, 7, 11 and 14. The construction of polygons from folded strips of paper is described in Chapters 2, 3, 7 and 11. Some of the polygons have hollow centres. The constructions are not exact, but the paper folding algorithms used mean that the polygons can be constructed to any desired degree of accuracy. Links between the construction of polygons and the theory of numbers are discussed. Construction of some of the models described is worth the effort. Extension of the edges of polygons to divide the plane into regions is discussed in Chapter 14.

Various aspects of regular and semi-regular polyhedra are discussed in Chapters 5, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12 and 14. The construction of regular polyhedra from conventional nets is described in Chapter 5. The construction of braided polyhedra from strips of paper woven together is described in Chapters 9 and 11. These braided flexagons are unusual and elegant, and are well worth constructing. Extension of the faces of polyhedra to divide space into regions is discussed in Chapter 14. The construction of rotating rings of polyhedra from two strips of paper woven together is described in Chapter 6. Nesting of polyhedra, for example fitting a regular tetrahedron into a cube, is discussed in Chapter 8. Symmetries of regular polyhedra are discussed in Chapter 10, together with some combinatorial properties of polyhedra. Chapter 12 is on collapsoids. These are non convex polyhedra, with several edges left disconnected, that can be collapsed flat. They are worth making to see how the faces move as a collapsoid is flattened. This is vaguely reminiscent of the motions of some flexagons.

Chapters 4, 7 and 17 are mostly devoted to the theory of numbers. Topics covered include folding numbers, the quasi-order theorem, Mersenne numbers, Fermat numbers, and coach theorems. Chapter 15 is historical, and describes the development of some of the ideas discussed in earlier chapters. Chapter 16 brings some loose ends together, and includes some memoire material.

This is a book to sample, rather than read straight through. The informal language used is not intrusive, enabling a reader to concentrate on the sometimes difficult content. Commentary to the proofs means that the mathematics can be understood without following a proof in detail. The book is well produced, and I did not notice any misprints.

While preparing this review I learned that Peter Hilton, a distinguished mathematician, had passed away at the age of 87. This book is a fitting memorial.


----
## Pyramid Flexagons
December 14, 2010

### Les Pook

Traditionally, the leaves used to construct flexagons are flat convex polygons that are hinged together in a band. The leaves are often regarded as rigid, although leaf bending is sometimes allowed during flexing. However, there is no mathematical reason why leaves have to be flat. The only restriction on their shape is that adjacent leaves must nest without interference when folded together. A pyramid flexagon is a conventional flexagon with the flat leaves replaced by appropriate open based right pyramids. Three examples are described in the attachment. This has also been uploaded to my website at http://lespook.wordpress.com/flexagons/pyramid-flexagons/


----
## Flexagon Xmas Puzzle
December 15, 2010

### Bob Harris

My annual puzzle card involves a flexagon this year:
http://www.bumblebeagle.org/xmas2010/index.html

Not particularly sophisticated from a flexagon standpoint, but some members of this list may find the puzzle enjoyable.


----
## Happy Holidays to All!
December 19, 2010

### Ann Schwartz

Wishing everyone in this group a wonderful holiday season and the best of everything in 2011.


----
Next year: [2011](2011.md)
