# Flexagon Lovers Newsgroup 2012

Previous year: [2011](2011.md)

----
## G4G10
April 15, 2012

### Scott Sherman

Recently, I had the pleasure of attending Gathering 4 Gardner 10 in honor of Martin Gardner and thought I'd give a short trip report.  As is fitting for a get together for Martin Gardner, there were people showing off new puzzles and interesting recreational mathematics as well as magicians, physicists, and a variety of educators.  Talks were limited to 6 minutes so there were lots of intriguing talks.  Of particular interest to this group were the talks on paper folding.

Robert Lang showed how to create a curved pentagonal piece of paper with 5 right angles instead of 4.  He then used the paper to create a 2-headed crane!  (If you don't know who Robert Lang is, stop right now and look him up.  He has taken origami to a whole new level.)

Jeannine Mosely talked about folding large structures entirely out of business cards.  She's the one who lead building the huge Menger sponge entirely out of business cards.

And, of course, there were flexagons.  I was happy to get to meet a couple of the people on this newsgroup:  Ann Schwartz and Bruce McLean.

Ann showed off her latest creation, the "Super Flexagon".  It can fold into a variety of shapes, including a Star of David consisting of 24 right triangles, an equilateral triangle of 18 right triangles, or a hexagon of 12 right triangles.  Ann likes making flexagons out of straight strips of paper, as she did for this new flexagon.  She played with some of my exotic flexagons, trying to figure out how she could fold them out of a straight strip.

Bruce McLean had a hexaflexagon big enough to demonstrate in front of a ballroom full of people.  He v-flexed through a series of states to a nice bi-colored state.  Unfortunately, a technical glitch kept him from performing to the music he had chosen, but it was obvious his flourishes were choreographed to a dramatic score.  I talked with him about how to fully explore hexaflexagons made from straight strips and I'll have more to say on that subject soon.

I demoed a wide variety of flexagons and flexes.  Some time soon I'll get around to posting more information about my recent explorations.

## Ravi Apte

Hi Scott,
Great to read your posting. I am based in Mumbai India and could not attend G4GX. Do you have links for photos or videos from the gathering.
It will be great to see some.

### Scott Sherman

Hi Ravi,

Too bad you couldn't make it.  It would have been fun to see some of your origami.  Have you been to any of the gatherings in the past?

For some reason it didn't occur to me to bring a good camera, so all I have is so-so pictures I took with my phone.  However, I see that a bunch of people have posted pictures to flickr, which is great.  http://www.flickr.com/search/?q=g4g10

I'll be posting more about my talk at some point, including videos.

## Ravi Apte

Hi Scott,
I have attended G4G7 and G4G8. They were great fun. But for a variety of reasons I have missed 9 and X.
I hope to be able to attend in 2013.

Thanks for sending the flickr link.

### Dan Garrett

Thanks, Scott for your "flexing" report of G4GX.
By way of introduction, I am Dan Garrett, one of the magicians who performed at G4GX. (They usually call on me to perform every year.)
I am also very interested in flexagons (thanks, Ann, for accepting me into this group). One of my earliest introductions to Gardner was his article on Flexagons in Scientific American. As a young freshman in high school, I made up several hexaflexagons from adding machine tape, then drew designs on them in pencil.
I may not be able to contribute to the advanced flexagonology of this group, but I would love to absorb the latest info from you all. ("Ya'll," in Atlanta-speak.)
(I later met Gardner in the field of magic, and we became friends. I also attended the first few G4G's with Martin in attendance. This was quite a personal high for me!)

### Scott Sherman

And thanks for your entertaining magic at G4GX, Dan.

As people watched me flex (and tried to replicate it), some people commented that it looked like magic.  Certainly seems like there's a magic trick waiting to be discovered somewhere in flexagons...

### Dan Garrett

In 1987, magician Dan Harlan released a trick called Color Mixer.
It was, in fact, a large, durable and colorful hexaflexagon. The presentation was very magical, and what made it entertaining was the very good script that came with the flexagon. (Of course, the "magic" was completely dependent on the general public being, for the most part, unaware of the existence of the hexaflexagon.)

### Scott Sherman

Here's an old ad for a "Magic-Flexigon" that "looks like a large 12" hot pad":  http://ventdj.blogspot.com/2012/02/any-flexagons-left-for-sale.html.


----
## flexagon comics
April 20, 2012

### Scott Sherman

I just spotted comics on a flexagon: http://mysite.verizon.net/vzey5cnm/id17.html.  It's very clever.  The picture on that page is actually very hi-res, so if you view it (e.g. in Firefox, right click on it and pick View Image), you can read the whole thing.

* First, you see the bad guy escaping from prison
* Flex and you see the bad guy trapping the good guy & his side kick
* Flex and you see the good guys trying to figure out what to do
* Flip it over and you see the good guys trapping the bad guy (a flexed version of step 2)
* Flex and you see the bad guy back in prison (a flexed version of the step 1)

He's used a combination of ambigrams (words that read differently when you flip them over) and pictures that look different when a side is flexed.  Unfortunately he doesn't sell those anymore.  But he's also got a couple other origami comics on his site.


----
## whirlwind
April 22, 2012

### Scott Sherman

Here's one of the videos I used in my G4G10 talk:  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F5cj3LL8pqE.  It's a whirlwind tour of a wide variety of flexagons and flexes including the triangle tetraflexagon, pentaflexagon, hexaflexagon, heptaflexagon, octaflexagon, enneaflexagon, decaflexagon, dodecaflexagon, square tetraflexagon, kite hexaflexagon, rhombic hexaflexagon, and pentagon hexaflexagon.  Flexes include the pinch flex, v-flex, tuck flex, pyramid shuffle, flip flex, silver tetra flex, box flex, and pivot flex.

If you've been following my work, a lot of this will look familiar, though there are some new flexagons and flexes in there as well.  You can find templates and descriptions for most of what's in the video at http://loki3.com/flex.

### Ann Schwartz

All wonderful. I am especially intrigued by the ones made of regular pentagons and heptagons.


----
## flying flexagons
April 28, 2012

### Scott Sherman

This interesting flying object looks like a flying flexagon:

http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/nstv/2012/04/flying-object-propels-itself-by-flipping-inside-out.html

### Ann Schwartz

I looked at this three times--really interesting. It's a little hard to see against the white background but worth it.

It does look like a living flexagon. It looks like it's made of 30-degree/60-degree/90-degree triangles, which form some flexagons. Scott, how did you find this link?

### Scott Sherman

I think it's actually more closely related to the kaleidocycle, but it is awfully flexagon like.  Someone had posted the link to Twitter, using the #G4G10 tag.


----
## flex theory
April 28, 2012

### Scott Sherman

For people interested in theory, you can find my G4G10 paper on flex theory at http://loki3.com/flex/g4g10/Flex-Theory.pdf.  It contains several sections.

1)  A general definition of flexagons and flexes.  My definition allows for a wider variety of flexagons than I've seen described elsewhere.

2)  Flex notation, which I introduced on this newsgroup a few years ago (post 601), for describing series of flexes.

3)  Definitions of various flexes using "pat notation," which tracks how the internal structure of a flexagon changes as you perform a series of flexes.  From this notation, you could write a program to automate exploration of flexagon states or to create new flexagons using flex generating sequences (see post 614).

4)  Some of the interesting results I've found using these flex definitions.

### Ann Schwartz

Thanks for posting into the files section.

Lots of fascinating objects and ideas here. I especially am intrigued by the trapezoids surrounding the hollow hexagon. I'll have to check your site for that one.

I glanced at the theory part too. By the way, there are flexagons made from non-congruent triangles also.

### Scott Sherman

You can make a simple version of a trapezoid flexagon by folding up a regular hexaflexagon and chopping off the tips, though more complex ones can be made with hinges across the new edges.  You can find some templates at http://loki3.com/flex/trapezoid.html.  The pinch flex will transform it from a 3-pointed star to a hollow hexagonal ring, but, as always, I have fun finding new flexes on new shapes.

In providing my definition, I was trying to capture the basic essence of flexagon behavior.  I believe that having all leaves be congruent and connected to two mirror images of themselves is fundamental to what a flexagon is.  That said, I agree that you can then create interesting variations from that starting point.  I created a flexagon maze with 9-leaves per side (http://loki3.com/flex/maze/ennea-maze.html) where some leaves are triangles and some are kites, but the mechanism I used is based on congruent triangles.

And, as with any definition, questioning the details can often lead to new ideas...


----
## sort of a sighting
June 7, 2012

### Kathy Knapp

This stuck me as funny, so I am passing it along. At least the first two frames apply to us.

http://www.gocomics.com/frazz/?ref=comics


----
## "The Month of the Flexagon"
October 1, 2012

### Scott Sherman

Vi Hart has named October "The Month of the Flexagon" and she's made an entertaining video about the origins of flexagation.  Check out http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=VIVIegSt81k.

### Ann Schwartz

Thanks Scott for the great Vi Hart video--love her stuff.

Happy October Flexagon Month to flexagon lovers everywhere.


----
## Flexagon Cushions
October 4, 2012

### Ann Schwartz

My older sister, Martha, who introduced me to flexagons decades ago, sent me this hexaflexagon cushion link:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d6BiHTVLXO4&feature=relate

And for those who prefer the tetraflexagon, there's:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_t0CSquzftM&feature=relmfu


----
## Origami "infinite flipper"
November 6, 2012

### hoodsmommy

A pretty tedious way to make this particular flexagon, which, IIRC, was the type used in a 2006 Popular Science Chevy ad. But it's pretty cool once assembled.

video
http://foldsomething.com/2010/origami-videos/infinite-flipper/

diagrams
http://www.origamiaustria.at/diagrams/infinite_flipper.pdf

### Ann Schwartz

Love the flipper but it would be faster to make a tetraflexagon. Interesting that it resembles it so much. It would have been great if they distinguished the different faces somehow so we could see how many there were. I'd make one myself except it looks like way too much work.

On another note, here's a link sent by Jean Pedersen to a delicious Vi Hart video for a hexaflexagon you can eat.


----
## Another origami flexagon
December 20, 2012

### hoodsmommy

http://www.barf.cc/flipper.pdf

Step 19, 23 and 24 aren't very clear, but if you realize that the model is supposed to be symmetrical about the central horizontal and vertical axes, you can figure it out.


----
## Happy Holidays
December 25, 2012

### Ann Schwartz

Happy Holidays to all flexagon lovers.

May the new year bring us all good health, peace, joy...and lots of flexagon insights and accomplishments.


----
Next year: [2013](2013.md)
