# Flexagon Lovers Newsgroup 2013

Previous year: [2012](2012.md)

----
## Flexagon Theory from H V McIntosh
January 10, 2013

### H V McIntosh

Last summer we had two flexagon projects, both titled "Flexagons as Dynamical Systems." They were a one-
hour-daily four-week class in an annual summer school, and a two-month "Summer of Academic Investigation."
The first was designed to provide background and information for another ongoing project somewhat vaguely
related to the history of the University's computer center. There is a programmable robot, an IBM 1130
computer, scads of lesser computers, and personnel from the founding (In the Days of Auld Lang Syne ...). The
clientelle consists of primary and preschool children, parents, teachers, and occasional groups of intermediate
or secondary levels. Well, the robot can play a synthesizer, so we at least have a spectacle. Flexagons are
things we have worked with, and considering Martin Gardner's talents and success as a magician, they seem
to be an acceptable mix to add to the presentation. However, the robot hasn't tried to flex one yet!

For teachers and other interested parties we have tried to prepare a kit with text, rolled paper, scissors, glue
and various templates and models. It has worked out reasonably well, as requests for sessions typically
include flexagons as well as the robot. So the Summer School was to give a more systematic background for
this activity.

In the process of revising the literature and previous work the whole theoretical background has seemed to
acquire a greater simplicity and unity, which is more the focus of the Research Summer and associated work.
We`ll probably try to repeat these activities again this coming summer. The central idea goes back to the ideas
of Michael Schlessinger, one of the students who worked at RIAS alongside Tony Conrad and Dan Hartline.
As I have finally understood it, the Catalan decomposition of a recursion is the essential element. It can be
seen in the Oakley-Wisner theory if you know to look for it,

What is to be done then is to recognize braid, scroll, and doubling as the primitive operations; realize that a
single cycle is dual to a tree, that a tree can be normalized to the vertices of a regular polygon, counting the
triangular dissections of which Euler knew how to do with Catalan numbers.

Instead of just counting, do the Catalan decomposition directly on the frieze code.

This outline hides quite a bit of vocabulary, history, and theory, but it remarkable how simple flexagon theory
really is!


----
## folded and flexed calendars
January 26, 2013

### Ralph Jones

There are now quite a number of origami and flexagon calendars, several of which I constructed, or implemented.

http://www.origami-resource-center.com/origami-calendars.html


----
## Pook's SF p.267
February 9, 2013

### Ralph Jones

I have been looking at the Uncut Silver Even Edge Flexagon with a Flat Main Position Link,
from page 267 of Pook's "Serious Fun...".
I hope the attachment speaks for itself.
Possible starts are (1) lift up, as in SF, (2) push down, (3a,b) one of each.
I welcome feedback or corrections or suggestions.
In case a person might not have this reference,
with Les Pook's permission(?), I have a one page extract I could post.

Because of the phrasing of the question someone originally asked,
I originally found 17 trivially 'different' flexes with the middle 8x8 of the 16x16 as one face.

### Les Pook

Ralph

I like your comment.

I am happy for you to post the extract but Springer own the copyright so you will need their permission. Go to www.springer.com, Services, Rights and Permissions. If this doesn't work my contact at Springer should be able to help: Nathalie Jacobs nathalie.jacobs@springer-sbm.com

My experience is that major publishers are helpful over this type of request.


----
## Martin Gardner in the Twenty-First Century
February 21, 2013

### Les Pook

The book ‘Martin Gardner in the Twenty-First Century’ has now been published by the Mathematical Association of America, both as an e-book and as a paper back. The book collects articles Gardner wrote for the MAA in the Twenty-First Century,  together with other articles the MAA published from 1999 to 2012 that spring from and comment on his work. There are four articles on flexagons.


----
## Video octaflexagon
February 22, 2013

### Ralph Jones

I like to give a name to a flexagon. When Moseley does this http://flexagon.net/, you have to know that Variation A refers to the hexaflexagon, or the heptaflexagon, under discussion at the moment. “Fire and Wood’ refers to the design he put on the faces.


In Scott Sherman’s marvelous silver octaflexagon video http://loki3.com/flex/octa.html, he uses what I will call SS8chain6 (lacking a better name). In this video, see how to do a twist flex (Tw), a double tuck (Dt), a pyramid shuffle (S), a silver tetra flex (St), and others.

Attached are my extended template, for making a SS8chain6 flexagon with extended labeling, and my current version of its (partial) face diagram. The flexes I have picked to use typically make 4+4 combinations of other faces.

Notice the (R,P,C) square figure in my diagram that repeats from the SF11.33 silver octaflexagon. Notice also the asymmetry of the two pinch flex 3-sequences. I haven’t yet tried to see what just two pyramid shuffles could do.


There are six independent faces (labeled 1,2,3,4,5,6 by Scott). When I used Dt,Tw flexes, I expected to be able to find a different set of six independent faces. This is what happened for other flexagons. But I found eight; that’s impossible. Here’s what happened in this flexagon.

Looking at the v2-diagram, there are eight faces on four new states X//Y, labeled A, B, C, D, and four labeled EF. As expected, faces A,B are independent 4+4 combinations of faces 2,3. The four faces labeled EF are just different 4+4 combinations of faces 1,4; not four independent faces, but two sets of two independent faces. This is the best way I have found to represent this situation – suggestions welcome.


A similar situation happened when I tried silver tetra flexes. Another surprise, some of the combinations were 2+6.

These diagrams suggest some possible identities like I≈?RPu or I≈?CuP or I≈?DtDtPP or I≈?StStPP , with some ^,<,> thrown in maybe? Details please, so one could follow the reasoning. Scott suggests PP≈(>^St^>>)x2, or I≈(>^St^>>)x2^PP^,  if I understand correctly.

As always, please let me know about ideas, suggestions, how to do better.

Also attached are my extended template, for making a SS8silver6 (lacking a better name) flexagon with extended labeling, and my current version of its (partial) face diagram. This is from the same web-page.


----
## Octaflexagon puzzle
February 22, 2013

### Ralph Jones

I was intrigued by Scott Sherman’s marvelous puzzle http://loki3.com/flex/maze/octa-paths.html.

I turns out that his puzzle is the same as (the mirror image of) SF11.27, a 4-sided silver octaflexagon. Attached are the section 11.2.5.2 from SF, my extended template for making a SF11.27 flexagon with extended labeling, and my current version of its (partial) face diagram.

Here is a good example of (four) alternate sets of four independent faces: (1,2,3,4) and (A,B,C,D) as labeled in SF; (K,L,M,N) and (W,X,Y,Z) emerge when using silver tetra flexes.

When I asked Scott about this flexagon, he said “BTW, it looks to me like, if you uniquely number each leaf, you can reach 33 unique states in that octaflexagon puzzle using P, T and St.  Other flexes, such as V, Lt, or F, aren't possible.”


----
## SF11.33 equals HP3.5
February 22, 2013

### Ralph Jones

I want to start a discussion about silver octaflexagons -- using a chain of 45-degree right triangles.

My notation is:
SF11.33 refers to the flexagon whose net is described in figure 11.33 of Les Pook's book "Serious Fun with Flexagons";
HP3.5 refers to the description by Hilton and Pedersen -- thanks to Ann Schwartz
for providing http://www.eighthsquare.com/8-gon.html an online reference.
Attached are (1) the relevant section 11.2.5.4 from SF, (2) a template for making your own SF11.33, and (3) what I refer to as a (partial) face diagram.

I want to extend the discussion using some flexes that provide alternate face-lists, but do not necessarily come even close to being a full state diagram. SF11.33 and HP3.5 are mirror images, an enantiomorphic pair, and Pook (page 6) suggests not distinguishing them. In this particular flexagon, the three flexes P, R, C meet my criteria. These are all variations on the pinch flex.

P refers to the pinch flex. I assume everyone is familiar with it applied the four side vertices.
R refers to the reverse pass through flex. When the four corner vertices are pinched and two of them are brought together underneath, a flat square is formed on top. Folding all four flaps upwards, together at the top, then opening finishes this flex.
C refers to (what I call) the corner pinch flaps down flex. When the four corner vertices are pinched forming a star shape, all four central flaps are brought down together underneath, then opening finishes this flex.
Their inverses are defined by I=P^P^, I=R^R^, and I=C^C^. This determines how the flexagon is opened after the mechanics of the flexing are done.

Other flexes I am considering are listed in the face diagram attachment. Scott Sherman has a marvelous video
http://loki3.com/flex/octa.html demonstrating flexing silver octaflexagons.
SF11.34 suggests another flex, twist plus box plus twist, that I have yet to consider. In general, the twist flex (I=Tw^Tw^) opens sometimes, sometimes requires a box flex in the middle, and sometimes doesn't seem to work at all.

Notice the square figure in my (partial) face diagram -- this seems to be a common factor for many silver octaflexagons (but I didn't find it in SF11.27). It seems clear that there must be some sort of identity involving these three flexes. Scott Sherman suggests
http://loki3.com/flex/g4g10/Flex-Theory.pdf using a "current vertex". Perhaps I=?RPC , or would some ^,<,> be required? I would welcome a detailed discussion about this. There is also some identity, perhaps I=?Dt^P^Tw^ , connecting the double tuck with the twist.

I have found one 3-faced, two 4-faced, two 6-faced, and one 8-faced silver octaflexagons. How many are there? How may they all be found, constructed? Pook suggests linking (page 265) to find some; Sherman suggests generating sequences
http://loki3.com/flex/flex/generating-sequences.html to find some. I thought about adapting
http://flexagon.net/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=31&Itemid=36 to silver octaflexagons. Any comments, ideas, suggestions?

### Scott Sherman

There's a lot to digest in all those posts, Ralph.  I'll address a couple questions...

First, your question of how many octaflexagons there are.  The short answer is lots.  And it depends on how you enumerate them.  To get an idea, you can look at Table 4.1 in Pook's Flexagons Inside Out, where he lists the number of types per face.  By the time you get to 10 faces, you're at 82 types.  And 15 faces gives you 24,834!  If you use flexes beyond just the pinch flex when creating flexagons (my concept of the flex generating sequence), the number is much higher.  Yaacov Belenky has a technique for enumerating & counting them all (he had a series of posts on the subject a few years ago).

Next, the question of how to create those various octaflexagons.  As you note, there are several different techniques people have come up with for creating them.  Since most flexagon theory has addressed the equilateral triangle hexaflexagon, I had previously described some ways that you could go from a particular hexaflexagon to any other type of triangle flexagon at http://loki3.com/flex/create.html.  Basically you can take the chain of equilateral triangles used in a hexaflexagon template and adapt it to other triangles, such as the 45-45-90 right triangles used in a silver octaflexagon.  A hexaflexagon has 3 copies of a pattern while an octaflexagon has 4 copies of that same pattern (when just using the pinch flex for generating the flexagon).  So any of the types of hexaflexagon can be converted into an octaflexagon, plus more.

### Scott Sherman

It turns out that the twist flex that involves a box flex in the middle (Twb) accomplishes exactly the same thing as the double tuck flex (Dt).  I created the minimal flexagon for the Twb (by pasting together all leaves that are unaffected by the flex) and it's exactly the same as the minimal flexagon for Dt.  Furthermore Dt is equivalent to two tuck flexes done on opposite vertices.  This gives us the following equalities:

```
Twb = Dt
Dt ≈ T>>>>T>>>>
```

I can understand why you were a bit unsure of the Dt^P^Tw^ equality.  You have to be very precise about keeping track of the current vertex and knowing exactly how to open up Tw to figure out what's going on.  But it turns out that that sequence doesn't bring you back to your exact starting point (it helps to mark the individual leaves to see this).  I found that repeating the sequence *twice* brings you back to your starting point.  In other words:

```
I ≈ (Dt^P^Tw^)x2
```

This is one of those cases where a video would make it much more obvious what I'm talking about.  While I haven't done a video for that sequence, I have some of the pieces in the video embedded in this page:  http://loki3.com/flex/octa.html (which will help those who don't know what these flexes are).

* 1:55 - shows the basic pinch flex (P)
* 3:56 - this is the twist flex with a box flex in the middle (Twb)
* 4:12 - this is the twist flex (Tw), though you should open it up to the blue side so that I ≈ Tw^Tw^
* 5:01 - shows the tuck flex (T)
* 5:11 - shows the double tuck (Dt)


----
## SF10.12 variations
February 23, 2013

### Ralph Jones

I’ve chosen to call the first variation SF10.12A1. (There is so much one can infer from a name. Guess where I’m going.)

With only 12 leaves, a simple 3-face silver octaflexagon, SF10.8b – variation A0. With 15 leaves, a nice “silver triangle quintuple”, SF10.11; this is variation A1. With 18,21,24 leaves, all assembled the same way, variations A2,A3,A4 make silver triangle hextuple, heptuble, octuple flexagons that have simple skew pinch 3-cycles.

In section SF10.2.4.2 (see attachment), Pook mentions that SF10.12 can be transformed “to the five sector fundamental silver even edge flexagon 5<silver>”; that is A1. I’m taking the opposite approach, since it is trivial to transform from A1 to SF10.12 via a square octaflexagon. I originally thought it was really neat that I could invert the key-pat, using a pinch flex on the related octaflexagon. But with this approach it is easy to see a way to invert the key-pat; and to find another set of key-pats.

The 5-cycle SF10.14 for SF10.12 expands to a double-spoke 5-cycle. There are two of them.

The structure of SF10.12A1 can add two pats onto the side of a 8-triangle square. The structure of SF10.12A2 adds two pats on to each of two sides of a 8-triangle square, any two sides, making two key-pats various ways. Variations A3, and A4 are similar.

Attached is a template for SF10.8b usable for variations A0, A1, A2, A3, A4.

Instead of starting with a silver trioctaflexagon, consider the above process with a silver tetraoctaflexagon, like SF11.33. This makes variations SF10.12B0, B1, B2, B3, B4 on the same theme. The key-pats now have two leaves.

Or use SF11.27, making variations SF10.12C0, C1, C2, C3, C4.


----
## Some silver hexadecaflexagons
February 25, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Here I do not mean a decaflexagon with six faces. I found the phrontistery, http://phrontistery.info/numbers.html, which assured me that hexadeca- is an OK prefix for sixteen. (I also found out that the only hexazetic word zenzizenzizenzic means “the eighth power”. The square root of the zenzizenzizenzic of 3 is 81.) (Didn’t my spell checker love this paragraph!)

I even have a name readily available – SF10.12A4 – for one of them. There seem to be eight faces: 1-4, 1-5, 2x, 2y, 2-4, 2-5, 1x, 1y. But with only 24 leaves, there can only be six independent faces. It’s just that faces 1 and 2 get rearranged by flexing. Attached is the net; other than some additional labeling, this is the same as for SF10.8b mentioned previously.

After assembly into a silver skew octuple, symmetrically place each of four of the corners to the right and behind its adjacent corner. This conversion to a flat square octaflexagon is followed by (cwFa”)x4, bringing each of the four flaps from underneath to the outside. This is a flat silver hexadecaflexagon. I use Fa” to indicate the reverse of a flap flex because I have noticed that using a single apostrophe is easy to visually miss using some fonts; cw means clockwise (would that be << since I mean to turn the flexagon counterclockwise?).

One basic flex is to undo all of this, do a pinch flex on the silver skew octuple, then repeat the conversion process. This has the effect of turning over each of the four single key-pats, depending on which four corners one picks. If I specify this effect, I’ll call it the Ba flex. Another way to get this result is roughly (cwFa)x4P^(cwFa”)x4.

Let me describe another basic flex Bb – roughly Fa,b,c(cwFa,b,c,a”)x3cwFa”. The 5-cycle flex described in section SF10.2.4.2 for SF10.12 consists of 4 flap flexes I’ll call Fa,b,c,a”. The last one actually occurs to the left; I consider this to be part of the flex mechanics. There seems to be an identity I=(Bb>>)x2, since things seem to move to the left.

Here is a rough interaction identity: I=BbBaBbBa. Makes a nice 4-cycle.

All of this process applies equally well to SF10.12B4 and SF10.12C4, two other silver hexadecaflexagons.

Please notice that all three of these have the same appearance as SF11.30. I guess this makes the octaflexagon net SF11.30 a hexadecaflexagon, just one with no flexes, unless you count ^,<<,>>. The conversion from SF11.30 to a silver octaflexagon applies equally well to these other hexadecaflexagons, providing an expanded set of (regular) octaflexagons. With 16, 24, 32, 32 leaves, there might be 4, 6, 8, 8 independent (flat) faces.

This whole process seems to be repeatable. I mean expansion of any octaflexagon to a skew octuple, doubling the number of leaves, converting to a SF11.30 look-alike (another hexadecaflexagon), then converting to a new silver octaflexagon.


----
## some identities for Tw,Dt interaction
March 1, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Thanks, Scott for your reply. Here’s what I guess might have happened. Referring to my previous diagram for the SS8chain6 silver octaflexagon in your video,

A//EF–→2//1–→4//2–→B//EF–→2//1–→4//2–→A//EF . Depending on which twist flex one chooses at 4//2, the next state is B//EF or A//EF. The former takes one twice around. The latter makes a simpler identity.

I found some similar, but different identities. You’re absolutely right, it takes (unique) marking to notice what happens. The way I do a twist flex is to fold the upper rectangle behind the lower rectangle (like you do at 4:12 ), bring forward and down the left side (like you do at 4:13 ), and open along the left edge (without the rotation you have at 4:14 , but opening up (“to the blue side”) as you suggest). Do you think that >> rotation should be part of the twist flex?

Here’s what I got. Using your SS8chain6 (new template attached), I started at EF//A with side vertex (#5,#-1) at the top.

1) I ≈ (Dt^PTw^)x2(>x4), without the extra ^ in it, but needing a rotation

2) I ≈ Dt^P^Tw(>x2) and I ≈ Dt^P>>Tw^ , also needing a rotation

3) ^Tw>> ≈ >>Tw^ , and Dt ≈ ^P>>Tw , and Tw ≈ Dt^P>>^  seem to follow algebraically, so the twist flex sort of commutes with the rotation.


----
## Leaf splitting
March 1, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Scott Sherman makes this statement: “There are two ways to perform this leaf splitting, ... The choice you make for the first leaf splitting operation determines the handedness of the flexagon. Every leaf splitting operation thereafter must use the same handedness; otherwise you no longer have a valid flexagon.”

I am trying to understand what this means. There are more than two ways to split a leaf that has more than three sides, which restricts this discussion to triangles.

Following is a list of some of the flexagons I have been working with recently. Each can be flexed so that alternate pats are each a singleton, while the other pats have the same structure. Therefore I need only mention one pat, and how the splitting process affects that one pat; then the other alternate pats will have the same structure. I intend to keep in mind this structure throughout this discussion.

If I split a leaf so that the top result is connected to the input hinge, I’ll call that “down5” if it is the fifth leaf from the top of the pat, otherwise “up5” if the top result is connected to the output hinge. One possible splitting sequence is mentioned for each flexagon.

```
Null flexagon                        pat2 = (2)
SF10.8b                              pat2 = (2,-3)                       [down1]
SF11.33                              pat2 = (2,(4,-3))                   [down1, up2]
SF11.27                              pat2 = ((-3,2),4)                   [down1, up1]
SS8chain6                            pat2 = (((-5,4),6),(2,-3))          [up1, down1, up1, down4]
SF8chain6 splitting detail           (2)→(-3,2)→((-3,4),2)→(((4,-3),-5),2)→(((-5,4),6),(2,-3))
SF8chain6 alternative                                                    [up1, down2, down1, up1]
HP3.11                               pat2 = ((-7,8),(((-3,4),2),(6,-5))) [exercise]
Pentahexaflexagon                    pat2 = (((4,-3),-5),2)              [up1, up1]
```

These are all valid flexagons.

Questions:

What does “must use the same handedness” mean?

Given a particular splitting result, other than physically constructing the corresponding chain, is there some way to determine whether the result will be a valid flexagon? Would every such splitting result be a valid flexagon?

Given a particular splitting sequence . . . ?

Which splitting sequences determine valid flexagons? Does it matter hexaflexagon, octaflexagon?

Is it possible, from this much information (alternate pats same structure), to determine whether two flexagons are equivalent? That is, either equal after flexing or enantiomers (an enantiomorphic pair)?

Can all valid flexagons be determined by leaf splitting?

What if some random splitting sequence were used on each pat?

### Scott Sherman

Consider a trihexaflexagon, the 3 sided hexaflexagon.  You make 3 folds to construct it.  If one side of your paper is white and the other blue, you can see that you have a choice between two different ways of making that first fold:  folding two white triangles together or two blue triangles together.  If, for example, you choose to fold the blue triangles together, the other two folds also have to be blue-on-blue or the resulting flexagon won't flex.  That first choice determines the handedness.  If you wanted to make that flexagon by splitting the leaves of a simple hexagon, each split would have to agree with the others.  The Conrad & Hartline paper formalizes this, though they don't really provide an intuitive way to understand it.  I haven't come up with a simple way to describe it, either, but hopefully this example helps a bit.

Note that this isn't limited to triangle flexagons.  For a given edge, there are two ways you could split the leaf.  Since a triangle in a flexagon is already connected along two of its three edges, you always have to split using the third edge as the hinge.  With a square, there are two edges you could use as a hinge, but still two different ways to split a single edge.  But, as I mentioned, the overall handedness of the flexagon determines which of the two ways you need to perform this split.

Ralph, you describe the hexaflexagon where you have 3-fold symmetry in the pat structure and that you can therefore just describe a single leaf splitting that will apply to the 3 corresponding pats.  Note that this means you're only using the pinch flex in your flex generating sequence (i.e., you're adding leaves based on pinch flexes you want to be able to perform).  If you use any other flex in your generating sequence, the pats don't change in a symmetrical fashion.

Most of the flexagon literature only considers the pinch flex, which means most of the literature would consider the technique you're describing to be a perfectly reasonable way to create "valid" flexagons, with random splittings not necessarily creating a valid flexagon.  My definition of "valid" is a bit more liberal in that I consider a wide variety of flexes.  Yes, I would claim that any random leaf splitting (assuming it's of the proper handedness) produces a valid flexagon.  No, it doesn't matter whether it's a hexaflexagon, octahexaflexagon, or if it's made up of pentagons or decagons.

### Scott Sherman

Oops, I meant that after you fold the first two blues together, the next fold needs to be white-on-white followed by blue-on-blue.

### Les Pook

I have been following recent postings with interest. This sort of issue caused me a great deal of angst when writing 'Serious Fun with Flexagons'. Enantiomorphism is straightforward when considering pinch flexing of a trihexaflexagon but presents subtleties when considering asymmetrical flexes and the uncut flexagons. In the end I had to restrict the amount of discussion or the book would never have been published. I did go slowly and carefully through Conrad and Hartline and tried to include their explanatons where appropriate.

### Ralph Jones

Yes, Scott, you are correct that there are only two ways of splitting a leaf at an outside egde. What I meant is there are 2^(n-2) ways to split a leaf with n edges.
I'm not sure what you mean about only pinch flexes. In my examples, I left pats {1,3,5,7} as singletons and split each pat {2,4,6,8} in exactly the same manner. The results listed {SF10.8b, SF11.33, SF11.27, SS8chain6, HP3.11, Pentahexaflexagon} have quite a wide variety of possible flexes. I had no flex generating sequence in mind, just the process of leaf splitting.

### Scott Sherman

What I meant was that splitting every other pat is the equivalent of creating a flexagon using only pinch flexes in its flex generating sequence.  Or, phrased another way, adding the leaves necessary to perform a pinch flex is done by splitting a leaf on every other pat.


----
## flexagon linking
March 5, 2013

### Ralph Jones

This posting is so long, and has so much detail, I preferred to attach a document.

### Scott Sherman

What you describe in there all sounds reasonable.  Basically you're describing a way to take existing pat structures from various flexagons that have some interesting behavior and combining them into a more complex flexagon.  Do you have any sense of how their state diagrams change as you combine them?

### Ralph Jones

I don't have a sense of the effect of linking on state diagrams.
I have attached the (partial) diagrams I have done so far for the involved flexagons.
There seems to be an explosion of flexes for linking SF10.8 with itself to get SF11.27.
All I have done so far is just to see if I understood the process mentioned in Pook's SF.


----
## St Patrick's day
March 12, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Here is a simple flexagon with some decoration.
Amazing how large the file becomes when adding that decoration.


----
## Alternating flexagons
March 12, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Again I have a long post that I prefer to attach.
As always, I solicit feedback.

### Scott Sherman

Lots of questions & observations in there.  I'll just comment on one question:

Question 5: There seems to be a one-to-one correspondence between all hexaflexagons and all
octaflexagons (and all even-flexagons), that are alternating. Merely extend, or lop off, the last
two pats. Might there be some relationship involving possible flexes?

First off, yes there's a correspondence, one that can be generalized beyond hexaflexagons and octaflexagons.  An "alternating" hexaflexagon consists of 3 repeats of the same pattern.  You can make an octaflexagon that consists of 4 repeats of that same pattern.  Or you can make a tetraflexagon using 2 repeats, a decaflexagon consisting of 5 repeats, etc.  Or, if you try only a single copy of the pattern, you end up with an inflexible wad of paper.  But, if you chop off the tips, you can turn it into a point flexagon (http://loki3.com/flex/point-flexagon.html).

Secondly, yes, there are lots of relationships between the flexagons that are made with different numbers of copies of that pattern.  Typically you can do the analog of the pinch flex in the same place in each variation.  Though, if the flexagon is a "cup" (e.g. a tetraflexagon made of equilateral triangles), you may not be able to do a pinch flex in some locations.  Flexes that operate on just a small part of the flexagon, such as the tuck flex or pyramid shuffle, can often be done in the same place in corresponding flexagons.  Some flexes may work better or worse depending on the angles of the various triangles.


----
## algorithm to fabricate a flexagon
March 26, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Please refer to attached document.

### Scott Sherman

Hi Ralph,

You don't actually need to tile the plane with a shape to use those techniques.  The instructions (e.g. R or L) tell you which edge to pick for reflecting the current triangle across a hinge.  You could use that technique on triangles of any shape, generating a strip that winds around, overlaps itself, etc.  But a nice tiling can make it easier to build up templates (as long as they don't happen to overlap themselves).


----
## Xd1u2-triflexagon
March 31, 2013

### Ralph Jones

*Correction to previous discussion: SF2.22a,b,c instead of SF2.21c,d,e. Also any leaf shape is OK, no restriction for tiling the plane.*

My first bronze fabrication template (BFT1) does include SF10.6a, but does not include SF10.6b. Attached is a second (additional) bronze fabrication template (BFT2) that does include SF10.6b. It also suggests various other possibilities, including a couple of bronze variations similar to SF10.5.

BFT1 also suggests a triangle-shaped, bronze flexagon with six pats and three sectors (SF2.22b). An appropriate name might be triflexagon (SFpage301). It looks very much like a bronze star edge ring, somewhat similar to the isosceles triangle flexagons at SF10.4.

This null bronze triflexagon has hinges at {aHaHaHa}, so a simple application of my algorithm would have three sectors of {aHba} with torsion T(sector)=1. It flexes nicely into a cone shape and two skew shapes.

The flex I have previously referred to as C-flex would seem appropriate for star edge rings. A second application of my algorithm would have three sectors of {aHbHa} with torsion T(sector)=2. The C-flex is possible. An appropriate name would be Xd1u2-triflexagon, an alternating, fully faced flexagon with torsion T=6. The two flat states/positions are 2//3 and 4//1, depending on how one labels the faces.

After making it, I found it at SF10.2.6.3. The first part is equivalent to SF10.26.

When I framed a definition for “fully faced” I was thinking about flat faces, but I guess cone/slant shapes and skew positions can count too.


----
## Torsion possibility?
March 31, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Torsion possibility?

I have another algorithm. I’ll call it the Q1 algorithm. With any luck, it will be the torsion of a pat. I welcome feed back from people more knowledgeable.

Ideally, given a pat like {2,{{4,{6,-5}},-3}}, it would be nice to be able to compute its torsion. I use the word compute here because it would be nice not to have to fabricate it and watch how the winding goes. So far I don’t know how to do this in general.

So let’s use some imagination. Imagine that you have the previous pat in your left hand, ready to assemble the following pat by twisting the chain of leaves with your right hand. Please refer to the two examples from the hinge algorithm for detail information.

I’ll boldly use the word torsion to mean Q1 value.

Here is example 1.

Since I do know how to construct this pat Pd1u2d2u3={2,{{4,{6,-5}},-3}}, I have four pieces of information available: (1) the sequence of split locations, (2) the sequence of up/down splits, (3) the sequence of leaves split, and (4) the sequence of hinges. The order that the leaves are split is {2,3,4,5}, the sequence of splits is {d,u,d,u} and the sequence of new hinges is {s,H,s,H}. Let’s match up the splits with the hinges {ds,uH,ds,uH}. The Q1 algorithm goes: down at the side hinge (ds) contributes +1 to the torsion, and up at the input hinge (uH) contributes +1 to the torsion; up at the side hinge (us), or down at the input hinge (dH), contributes -1 to the torsion.

Conclusion: Q1[Pd1u2d2u3]=+1+1+1+1=+4.

This example illustrates half of the algorithm.

Here is example 2.

For the pat Pu1d1u1d4={{{-5,4},6},{2,-3}}, the order that the leaves are split is {2,3,3,2}, the sequence of splits is {u,d,u,d} and the sequence of new hinges is {osoH}. The sequence of splits needs to be aligned with the leaves in the same manner as the new hinges were determined. This would be {d,u,u,d}. Matching the splits with the hinges {do,us,uo,dH} isn’t quite good enough – a split at the output hinge seems kind of neutral. But what happens next may make a difference. Let’s match the output splits with the next hinge {do>s,us,uo>H,dH}. The Q1 algorithm goes: up at the output hinge going towards the side (uo>s) contributes +1 to the torsion, down at the output hinge going towards the input hinge (do>H) contributes +1 to the torsion; (uo>H) and (do>s) each contribute -1 to the torsion.

Conclusion: Q1[Pu1d1u1d4]=  –1–1–1–1=–4.

This example illustrates the other half of the algorithm.

Any chance Q1 could be the torsion?

One consequence of this Q1 algorithm is that the value is always even for an even number of splits, and always odd for an odd number of splits.


----
## Pinch flex question
May 7, 2013

### Ralph Jones

Pinch flex question



Scott Sherman, http://loki3.com/flex/g4g10/Flex-Theory.pdf , says

Now look at the definition of the pinch flex.

    (^b,a) (^c) (e,^d) (f) (^h,g) (^i)  P→  (b) (^d,c) (^e) (g,^f) (h) (a,i)

This is the same way I have been implementing pinch flexes in software recently for the octaflexagons I have been working with. I phrased it equivalently as

    (a)(b,c)(d) … (g,h) P→ (h,^a)(^b)(c,^d) … (^g).

I used this same description in my “Flexagon linking” example (#805 on March 6).

My question is: How can there be a definition of pinch flex that involves specific pat structure?

I feel I have a good reason for asking this question. Throughout SF, Les Pook uses terminology like “fourfold pinch flex” (referring to octaflexagons); and threefold pinch flex (referring to hexaflexagons). That is, he has a mechanical, hands-on, manual definition of what one does to do a pinch flex with a flexagon that is held in ones hands. My distinction just now is the difference between doing a pinch flex and implementing a pinch flex in software.

I recently used my software to pinch flex the SF11.30 octaflexagon. It is very easy manually, holding it in my hands, to pinch flex this octaflexagon. The details are

    (-1,2)(-4,3)(6,-5)(7,-8)(-9,10)(-12,11)(14,-13)(15,-16)

            P→ (-16,(-2,1))(-5,(-3,4))(-6)(-7)(-8,(-10,9))(-13,(-11,12))(-14)(-15)

    or (??) (a)(b)(d,c)(e,f)(g)(h)(j,i)(k,m) P→ (m,^a)(c,^b)(^d)(^e)(f,^g)(i,^h)(^j)(^k)

I quickly got over the shock that my software did not do it correctly. But now I wonder how to implement a pinch flex that would include this octaflexagon.

My question rephrased: How can there be an implementation of pinch flex that involves specific pat structure?


----
## Flexagons & Symmetry groups
June 28, 2013

### Romain Versaevel

Hello everyone,

I'm a 19-years-old French student in mathematics; I'm currently preparing a presentation about Polya's enumeration theorem for a competitive exam.

I have discovered flexagons very recently and immediatly I thought it could be a wonderful subject to speak about in my presentation. Indeed, Polya's theorem allows to count the number of possible drawings of a symmetrical object.

That's why I am writing to you today. You know flexagons a lot better than I do, so you can probably help me. I am looking for 'exotic' examples of symmetry groups. The cyclic group C3 group acts on the trihexaflexagon, but there is no symmetry group under the hexahexaflexagon. Do you have more complicated examples for me? Do you know original flexagons with a symmetry group?


----
## Happy Holidays to all Flexagon Lovers
December 21, 2013

### Ann Schwartz

Happy holidays and happy new year to all.

Here's hoping 2014 will be a great year and one filled with lots of folding and flexing.


----
Next year: [2016](2016.md)
